
Date and Time: Friday, 24 November 2023 16:00:00 CET
Job Number: 211193211
Documents (100)


Ceasefire between Israel and Hamas comes into effect ahead of expected Gaza hostage release
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 6:01 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 964 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Mediator Qatar says operations room in Doha will monitor the truce in seven-week war and the exchange of first group of Israeli hostages for jailed PalestiniansIsrael-Hamas war: latest updates
Body


The ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas came into effect on Friday at 7am, ahead of the expected release of the first group of Israeli hostages held by the militant Islamist organisation in return for Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.
Underlining the fragility of the four day pause in hostilities, an alert sounded in Israel at 7.15am local time warning of a possible incoming rocket from Gaza targeting a village in southern Israel.
The diplomatic breakthrough , delayed by 24 hours, marks the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and offers some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.
Officials in Qatar, which has played a key role as an intermediary, said an operations room there will monitor the truce and the release of hostages from Gaza. They have direct and real-time lines of communication with Israel, the Hamas political office in Doha and the ICRC, Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for Qatar’s foreign ministry, Ansari said.
The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  after days of speculation and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.
Ansari said the two sides had exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – would be freed on Friday afternoon. Ansari did not specify how many Palestinian women and children will be released on Friday or when this would take place.
Increased aid for Palestinians would start to enter “as soon as possible”, Ansari said.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  it has held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza which has endured heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
The exchange of female and child hostages and prisoners was due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out during 24 hours of frantic diplomacy.
Sources close to the negotiations said Israel  had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release. Communication between the parties has to pass from Israeli officials to Qatar, then to Hamas  leaders outside Gaza and finally those inside the territory, a process that slowed any resolution of outstanding issues, the sources said.
The senior Israeli official in charge of arrangements for the hostage release, Brig Gen Gal Hirsch, confirmed Israel had received a list of the names of the hostages to be freed. “Liaison officers have informed all of those families whose loved ones appear on the list, as well as all of the hostages’ families,” Hirsch said.
Reports in Israel  suggest the hostages will be released across the Rafah border crossing into Egypt and then be brought to Israel by the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent (ICRC).
The agreement includes a halt to Israeli military flights over southern Gaza , with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the truce, according to a Hamas statement.
Hamas is understood to be particularly concerned by the prospect of surveillance by drones during the release of hostages, a process that would expose their militants and potentially some of their infrastructure or even whereabouts of key leaders.
The hostages to be freed are women and children, and the Palestinian prisoners are also women and children, both sides have confirmed.
If the first exchanges go well, and Hamas can locate more female hostages or children, there will be further releases on both sides, reports suggest. Some sources have suggested the ceasefire could run for up to 10 days.
The deal, struck after lengthy and complex talks mediated by Qatar , the US and Egypt, comes more than six weeks after the conflict began last month. At least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, were killed in the Hamas attacks on 7 October, and more than 240 people taken hostage.
The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials. More are thought to be under rubble. Swaths of northern Gaza have been destroyed in the fighting, and up to a million people displaced.
Israel says it has killed thousands of Hamas fighters, without presenting evidence for its count.
Fighting on Thursday had continued at even greater than normal intensity, with Israeli jets hitting more than 300 targets and troops engaged in heavy clashes around Jabalia refugee camp north of Gaza City.
NGOs working with Palestinian prisoners said the arrangements for their release from Israeli jails was unclear even as late as Thursday evening, with continuing discussions about where they would be freed by Israeli authorities.
The prisoners to be freed are understood to come from across the occupied West Bank.
Though the deal has raised hopes of a more durable cessation of hostilities, Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed it will be temporary and will not end the campaign to destroy Hamas. 
The Israeli defence minister, Yoav Gallant, said during a visit to a naval base on Thursday: “This will be a short respite, at the end of which the fighting will continue intensely, and we will create pressure to bring back more hostages. At least another two months of fighting is expected.”

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war live: four-day ceasefire begins but IDF says ‘war is not over yet’
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 2:41 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:12
Length: 4532 words
Byline: Kevin Rawlinson (now) and Helen Livingstone (earlier)
Highlight: Aid trucks are reported to have entered Gaza and some Israeli hostages are due to be released later today Israel and Palestine: a complete guide to the crisis
Body


block-time published-time 8.18am GMT 
The UK’s prime minister, Rishi Sunak, has thanked Qatar and Egypt for their “intensive diplomacy” in helping to secure the pause in the fighting in Gaza.
The temporary truce came into effect early on Friday, setting the stage for the exchange of dozens of hostages held by militants in Gaza for Palestinians imprisoned in Israel. 
Sunak tweeted: “This humanitarian pause is critical to end the terrible ordeal of hostages held by Hamas and get life-saving aid into Gaza.
“I want to thank Qatar, Egypt and others for the intensive diplomacy that has got us here. We will not stop until all hostages are safely returned.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.23am GMT
block-time published-time 8.16am GMT 
People in Gaza are salvaging what they can as the guns fall silent.
    A man salvages objects amid rubble of a school hit during an Israeli strike before the start of the truce Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images      A child stands amid the rubble of a school hit during an Israeli strike before the truce took effect Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 7.33am GMT 
Aid trucks have been pictured as they enter Gaza via the Rafah crossing hours after the start of a four-day truce.
    Trucks carrying humanitarian aid enter Gaza Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.11am GMT
block-time published-time 6.56am GMT 
 Aid trucks begin entering Gaza, Reuters reports  
Aid trucks have begun entering the Gaza Strip from Egypt around 90 minutes after a truce began between Israel and Hamas fighters, according to Reuters TV footage.
Two of the trucks, representing Egyptian organisations, sported banners that said “Together for Humanity”. Another said “For our brothers in Gaza”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.06am GMT
block-time published-time 6.55am GMT 
Pictures taken during the first hours of the truce have begun emerging from Gaza and the border area:
    Palestinians who had taken refuge in temporary shelters return to their homes in eastern Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip on Friday. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images      Displaced Palestinians go to check on their homes in Khan Younis. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images      A convoy of Israeli tanks and armoured personnel carriers after leaving Gaza during the temporary truce. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters      An Israeli soldier in a military vehicle after leaving Gaza during the temporary truce. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters      
block-time published-time 6.48am GMT 
Advanced plans by Saudi Arabia  to strike a peace deal with the Houthi rebels in Yemen are being jeopardised by Houthi attacks on Israel and this week’s seizure of an Israeli-linked commercial vessel in the Red Sea.
Saudi Arabia hopes it can maintain a firewall between the Yemen peace talks and the Houthis’ attacks on Israel , but in London and Washington there is pressure to redesignate the Houthis as a terrorist organisation, which would threaten any deal.
There are also reports that the US is willing to launch an attack on Houthi military sites in and around Yemen’s capital, Sana’a, as well as its port operations room, unless the ship seized on Sunday , the Galaxy Leader, is released.
Last week the Saudis summoned the official UN-recognised Yemen  government for further talks in Riyadh to present a revised roadmap that would lead to foreign forces, including those from Saudi Arabia, leaving in six months. It includes a budget deal under which large sums would be transferred from the oil-rich south to the impoverished north, which is dominated by the Iranian-backed Houthis.
Critics of the deal claim it empowers the Houthis, but Saudi Arabia, eager to exit what has proved to be an ill-judged military intervention in Yemen’s civil war, wants to end its engagement as quickly as possible.
 Related:  Houthi attacks on Israel jeopardise Saudi peace efforts in Yemen
block-time published-time 6.34am GMT 
Britain will provide a further £30m ($37.38m) of humanitarian aid to Gaza, the UK foreign secretary, David Cameron, has said as he travels to the occupied Palestinian territories on the second day of his visit to the region.
Cameron will meet Palestinian leaders and aid agencies.
On Thursday, he met the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu , during which he expressed hope that the truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”.
In a statement  on Friday, Cameron said:
We are hopeful that today will see the release of hostages, and I am urging all parties to continue to work towards the release of every hostage. A pause will also allow access for life-saving aid to the people of Gaza.
I am proud that a fourth UK flight carrying critical supplies landed in Egypt today, and I can announce new £30m of funding which will be spent on vital aid such as shelter and medical provisions.
It is vital to protect civilians from harm, and we are urgently looking at all avenues to get aid into Gaza, including land, maritime and air routes. The new pledge will double the amount of additional aid Britain has committed to Gaza since the conflict began in October.
     David Cameron (left) visits kibbutz Be’eri, where scores of people were killed in Hamas’s 7 October attack, with the Israeli foreign minister, Eli Cohen. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.48am GMT
block-time published-time 6.17am GMT 
The hostage release is due to start at 4pm, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz has reported , without citing a source.
It’s not clear who will be in the first batch to be released but there have been lots of reports about the possibility of Avigail Idan, an American child who turns four on Friday, being among them.
When asked about the possibility of her being among those released, the US president, Joe Biden, said: “I’m keeping my fingers crossed.”
Avigail was kidnapped from kibbutz Kfar Aza on 7 October during the Hamas attack on southern Israel , according to the Jerusalem Post.  Her parents, Roee and Smadar Idan, were killed while her two older sibilings survived by hiding in closets.
No soldiers are expected to be among the women released.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.34am GMT
block-time published-time 6.08am GMT 
 'War is not over yet', Israeli military spokesperson warns  
“The war is not over yet,” the Israeli military spokesman Avichay Adraee has said in a message in Arabic to Palestinian civilians in Gaza. In a post on X, formerly Twitter, he said:
The humanitarian pause is temporary. The northern Gaza Strip is a dangerous war zone and it is forbidden to move north. For your safety, you must remain in the humanitarian zone in the south.
It is only possible to move from the north of the Strip to the south via Salah al-Din Road. The movement of residents from the south of the Strip to the north is not allowed and dangerous
enltr??Watch this important message from the IDF Spokesperson for Arab media, @AvichayAdraee , to the civilians of Gaza: ”The war is not over yet. The humanitarian pause is temporary. The northern Gaza Strip is a dangerous war zone and it is forbidden to move north. For your safety,… https://t.co/OmtxDYHIK3 pic.twitter.com/4gaJDxgy5I
 — Israel Defense Forces (@IDF) November 24, 2023
Prior to the ceasefire, Israel repeatedly bombed the south of Gaza despite telling Palestinians to flee there.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.10am GMT
block-time published-time 5.42am GMT 
 Truce officially in place but sirens sound in southern Israel  
Around 40 minutes into the truce it’s difficult to say whether it’s holding. The Israeli military (IDF) said sirens warning of potential incoming rockets had sounded in two Israeli communities near Gaza but there was no immediate confirmation that attacks had occurred or of any damage or casualties.
A CNN team in the southern Israel city of Sderot meanwhile reported “loud booms” that sounded like Israeli artillery fire landing in Gaza, up to 15 minutes after the ceasefire was meant to be in place. Smoke was also continuing to rise from Gaza, the source of which was unknown, the team said.
Hostilities appeared to have continued up until the last moment, with Israeli forces reportedly attacking the Indonesian hospital in northern Gaza overnight, as well as striking a residential building in Nuseirat refugee camp in central Gaza.
A BBC reporter also in Sderot noted an Israeli airstrike as well the sound of small arms fires, drones and mortars with less than an hour to go before the truce.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.08am GMT
block-time published-time 5.22am GMT 
 Sirens sound in Israeli communities near Gaza border, Israeli military says  
Sirens warning of potential incoming rockets have sounded in communities near the Gaza Strip, the Israeli military (IDF) has said in a Telegram post.
As we reported earlier  it said sirens had sounded in a kibbutz near the Strip a couple of hours before the truce was due to come into effect. Fifteen minutes before the 7am start time it said sirens had also sounded in kibbutz Nir Oz.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.23am GMT
block-time published-time 5.11am GMT 
Our correspondent Jason Burke has interviewed Dr Paul Ley, a French orthopaedic surgeon at the European hospital in Khan Younis, southern Gaza, where conditions are dire. Here’s an excerpt from his story:
Ley said the hardest thing for doctors was to make triage decisions. “We do our triage … [asking] are we going to take this patient because they will have a good chance of surviving rather than doing desperate measures on a patient who will die in two or three days? That sounds nice on paper, but when you have to make the decision it is different. There’s a 12-year-old with 90% burns so we won’t treat him except for pain control that is not enough,” he said.
“We try to keep our heads cool and steady, but for local staff this is their families, friends, their people. They never want to amputate. They say: ‘I can’t do it any more’ and so I say: ‘OK I will do it, don’t worry,’ and you can feel the relief”.
Ley said he had been shocked at how passive many patients were, such as one 35-year-old woman whose husband and children had been killed when the family’s home was destroyed, and who appeared unmoved when told both her legs would need to be amputated. “So many just don’t care any more,” he said.
 Related:  ‘We are overwhelmed’: southern Gaza’s exhausted doctors forced to leave children to die
block-time published-time 5.02am GMT 
The truce should now theoretically be in effect, as the clocks have struck 7 am in Israel and Gaza.
block-time published-time 4.53am GMT 
Israeli strikes on Gaza have reportedly continued overnight, with Al Jazeera reporting an attack on a residential building in Nuseirat refugee camp in central Gaza. 
A BBC reporter in Sderot in southern Israel also noted an Israeli airstrike, drones and the sound of small arms and mortar fire coming from Gaza with less than an hour to go before the truce is supposed to be implemented. 
It’s now minutes before it is due to take effect. 
block-time published-time 4.42am GMT 
 Israeli forces raid Indonesian hospital, Al Jazeera reports  
One woman has been killed and three others wounded after Israeli forces raided the Indonesian hospital in northern Gaza, Al Jazeera is reporting, citing Dr Munir al-Bursh, the director general of the Hamas-run ministry of health in Gaza.
Another three people were arrested at the hospital, which has been forced to cease operations. As of Thursday, there were an estimated 550 patients remaining at the hospital, as well as 200 medical workers and at least 1,500 displaced Palestinians sheltering at the hospital, according to Al Jazeera.
Dr Sarbini Abdul Murad, head of the Indonesian charity Medical Emergency Rescue Committee (MER-C), which helped fund the hospital’s construction told Al Jazeera the attack on the medical facility overnight had caused extensive damage. Speaking from Jakarta, he said:
Last night, Israeli forces attacked the hospital with tanks and destroyed all of the first floor. The damage was very bad.
Previously, they had attacked the third floor. They arrested at least three people. This is their way of taking over the hospitals before the ceasefire today.
Israeli forces surrounded the Indonesian hospital with tanks earlier this week, with doctors reporting that staff and patients were terrified. Here’s an explainer written earlier this week on the situation at the hospital:
 Related:  What is Gaza’s Indonesian hospital and why is Israel targeting it?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.43am GMT
block-time published-time 4.17am GMT 
More Palestinian people, including women, were detained by Israeli forces as they tried to move south on Thursday compared to previous days, a monitoring team belonging to the UN’s humanitarian agency (OCHA) has reported. 
In its latest update  on the conflict, OCHA said that the team had documented family accounts of women being detained for hours or even days before being released. There were also cases of unaccompanied children and separated families moving south.
Israeli forces have been arresting some people as they move down the main traffic artery between north and south, Salah Ad Deen road, which has been designated a “corridor” by Israel, which has been urging people to leave the north, OCHA reported. It added:
IDPs [internally displaced persons] interviewed by OCHA reported that Israeli forces had established an unstaffed checkpoint where people are directed from a distance to pass through two structures, where a surveillance system is thought to be installed. 
IDPs are ordered to show their IDs and undergo what appears to be a facial recognition scan.
     People fleeing northern Gaza reach the central Gaza Strip on foot via the Salah al-Din road on 5 November. Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 3.54am GMT 
Israel continued its airstrikes on Thursday, with Palestinian Wafa news agency reporting that dozens were killed in Israeli bombing raids in Nuseirat and its camp in the central Gaza Strip, and in Jabaliya in the north. Jabaliya has been the scene of days of heavy fighting on the ground.
Among those reported killed in Nuseirat was a photojournalist, Mohammad Moin Ayyash, and his family.
Another resident, Hosni Moharib, bursting into tears, told the Associated Press news agency that his wife and several children were killed and other relatives remained buried under the rubble when an Israeli strike levelled a residential building in Nuseirat. He said:
It exploded on the house, striking the babies and young children. Everyone in the house, they are all dead.
     Residents search for victims after an Israeli strike in Nuseirat, central Gaza on Thursday. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 3.41am GMT 
Sirens warning of incoming rockets were activated in kibbutz Nir Am near Gaza this morning, the Israeli military has said on Telegram. No further information was immediately available.
The truce is due to come into effect in just under an hour and a half and we’ll be watching to see if it is observed by both sides.
block-time published-time 3.31am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images coming to us from Gaza:
    Ambulances on a road near an Israeli tank in the Gaza Strip. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      Palestinians help a man injured in an Israeli strike on residential houses in Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip on Thursday. Photograph: Ismail Muhammad/UPI/Shutterstock      Palestinians from Gaza City flee to the south. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      Palestinians sheltering at al-Aqsa hospital in Deir el-Balah, central Gaza, queue to receive food. Photograph: Majdi Fathi/NurPhoto/Shutterstock      
block-time published-time 3.20am GMT 
 Whole world 'shocked' at images coming from Gaza, Spanish PM tells Netanyahu  
Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez , has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians, including thousands of children”.
Sánchez’s blunt pleas came during a visit to the Middle East with the Belgian prime minister, Alexander de Croo, during which he called for a peace conference and reiterated that the creation of a Palestinian state remained the best way to bring peace and security to the region.
Speaking as he met Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday afternoon, Sánchez said Spain  had repeatedly condemned Hamas’s “shocking acts of terrorism” and acknowledged Israel’s right to defend itself.
But he added: “Let me also be clear: Israel must abide by international law, including international humanitarian law, in its response … The whole world is shocked at the images that we see coming from Gaza  every day. The number of Palestinians killed is truly unbearable. I believe that all civilians must be protected at all costs.”
Sánchez said “a serious and credible prospect for peace” was more necessary than ever. “Without a political settlement, we are bound to run again into a never-ending cycle of violence.”
 Related:  Number of Palestinians killed is ‘truly unbearable’, says Spanish PM
block-time published-time 3.07am GMT 
Ziad, a 35-year-old Palestinian in Gaza, has been keeping a diary for the Guardian. In case you missed the latest instalment, here’s an excerpt:
I am walking with Ahmad when we pass a bombed house. The house has collapsed and looks like a pile of giant Lego pieces. The surprising part is that there is one part of the house that is still perfectly fine – the kitchen and the room next to it on the second floor fell in one piece over the rubble. Even the kitchen sink is perfectly fine.
I stop for a while to look at the scene and think of the owners and how they would feel every time they pass by. I bet there have been a lot of happy moments in that kitchen, cooking meals for family gatherings, and maybe gossiping about what’s happening. The next room could be a playroom for the children or maybe a teenager lying on their bed thinking of their crush. 
Then it hits me: did the residents of the house make it out alive? Or were they sleeping when it happened?
Read more below:
 Related:  Gaza diary part 26: ‘There is still space for acts of kindness, moments of joy’
block-time published-time 2.57am GMT 
It is hoped the truce may offer Palestinians in Gaza some relief from the relentless bombardments they have endured over the past six weeks, which the Hamas government says have killed around 15,000 people.
For many families however, it comes too late. Fida Zayed, whose 20-year-old son Udai was killed in a recent air strike, told AFP:
The living here are the ones who are dead.
The last thing he [my son] said to me was that he was waiting for the truce on Friday. He asked me to prepare him a feast of rice and chicken.
I hope me and my children die here so we don’t have to mourn each other.
block-time published-time 2.48am GMT 
 Truce expected to begin at 7am (0500 GMT), Qatar says  
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza  between Israel and Hamas will begin on Friday morning after negotiators worked out the final details of the deal, which will lead to the release of dozens of hostages held by militants as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.
Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, announced the ceasefire would start at 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT).
He said the two sides had exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – would be freed on Friday afternoon. Increased aid for Palestinians would start to enter “as soon as possible”, Ansari said.
The 150 Palestinian prisoners to be released are also women and children but it was not clear when they would be freed.
The diplomatic breakthrough  promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.
Reports in Israel  suggest the hostages will be released across the Rafah border crossing into Egypt and then be brought to Israel by the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent (ICRC).
 Related:  Gaza ceasefire to begin on Friday morning with hostage releases to follow
block-time published-time 2.41am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Hello and welcome to the live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war with me, Helen Livingstone.
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas is expected to take effect at 7am local time (0500 GMT) with the release of the hostages expected to follow on Friday afternoon.
Israel and Hamas have exchanged lists of those to be released, with Hamas expected to free 13 women and children, Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson Ansari said. He did not specify how many Palestinian women and children will be released on Friday or when this would take place.
Israel has notified the families  of the hostages set to be released on Friday, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari said. Joe Biden said he has his “fingers crossed”  that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl will be released.
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will beginat 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT), Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, has announced.  The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.The release of hostages is expected to follow on Friday afternoon. Israel and Hamas have exchanged lists of those to be released, with Hamas expected to free 13 women and children,  Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson Ansari said. He did not specify how many Palestinian women and children will be released on Friday or when this would take place. Israel has notified the families  of the hostages set to be released on Friday, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari said .Joe Biden said he has his “fingers crossed”  that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl will be released.Overall, Hamas has agreed to free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages it has held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October, under the terms of the agreement. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.In a separate agreement, Hamas is set to unconditionally release 23 Thai hostages it is holding in Gaza, according to a report by the Al-Araby Al-Jadeed news site.  The release of Thai hostages came after Iran-mediated talks , the outlet reported on Thursday.A special flight has evacuated 103 Russian nationals from Gaza , Russia’s emergencies ministry said early on Friday. In a post on Telegram, the ministry said the group flew to Moscow aboard a chartered Ilyushin-76 aircraft, Reuters reported. The post said 101 Russian nationals had been taken from Gaza to Egypt in the past 24 hours, bringing to more than 750 the total number of Russian evacuees. More than 650 had been flown to Russia, including more than 300 children.The exchange of Palestinian and Israeli female and child hostages and prisoners had been due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out. Sources close to the negotiations said  Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.The diplomatic breakthrough promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones.Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, has said the military will resume fighting against Hamas “with intensity” for at least two more months. Addressing Israeli troops on Thursday, Gallant instructed them to “organise…resupply arms,  and get ready to continue” during the “short” respite in fighting.Israel’s army arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital on Thursday, more than a week after it surrounded and raided the medical facility. Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said, amid reports  that the IDF had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy. The IDF confirmed Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. Just two doctors are left  at al-Shifa to treat the remaining estimated 200 patients, the hospital’s head of plastic surgery has said.Israeli forces bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians. Gaza’s health ministry said 27 people were killed in a strike on a school affiliated with the UN Palestinian refugee agency (UNRWA)  in Jabaliya refugee camp. The Palestinian Wafa news agency reported that dozens had been killed in Israeli bombing raids in Nuseirat and its camp in the central Gaza Strip, and in Jabaliya in the north. Among those reported killed in Nuseirat was a photojournalist, Mohammad Moin Ayyash, and his family.The IDF said it has killed the commander of Hamas’s naval forces in Khan Younis in an airstrike in the Gaza Strip.Amar Abu Jalalah was killed  along with another member of the Hamas naval forces, the IDF said in a statement on Thursday.More than 13,000 Palestinians have been recorded killed in Gaza since the war began, according to Gaza’s health ministry.  The director of the health ministry, which is run by the Hamas government, said another 6,000 people have been reported missing and are feared buried under the rubble. Israel’s assault on Gaza followed the Hamas attack on 7 October which killed at least 1,200 Israelis, mostly civilians.UK foreign secretary David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu during a visit to Israel, and expressed hope that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”. The Israeli prime minister told Cameron that the precondition for peace in the Middle East was the eradication of what he called the “genocidal terrorist cult” Hamas. His remarks gave the impression that Netanyahu is not currently interested in anything but a military solution  to the future of Israel’s security.Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians,  including thousands of children”.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




‘Praying to hear good news’: hopes rise that Thai hostages in Gaza could be freed
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 6:51 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 585 words
Byline: Rebecca Ratcliffe and Navaon Siradapuvadol in Bangkok
Highlight: Thai authorities have been in talks with Qatar, Egypt and Iran in an effort to free the 26 Thai nationals held by HamasIsrael-Hamas war: latest updates
Body


Hopes have risen that 23 Thai nationals being held hostage in Gaza could return home after it was reported they are set to be released by Hamas without conditions.
Thai officials are yet to confirm the development, which was reported by Al-Araby Al-Jadeed news site on Friday.
At least 26 Thai nationals are being held by Hamas, while 39 Thai nationals have been killed, according to Thai officials. Three people remain in hospital.
Thousands of Thais worked in Israel’s agricultural sector prior to 7 October, and the Israeli government has said they make up the biggest group of foreign people killed or missing in the Hamas attacks. 
The purported release is not related to the recent deal reached by Israel and Hamas  to hand over dozens of Israeli hostages as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel, the report by Al-Araby Al-Jadeed said.
Over recent weeks, Thai government representatives have met officials in Qatar and Egypt, and last month travelled to Tehran to hold talks with Hamas in an effort to secure hostages’ release.
Areepen Uttarasin, a lead negotiator, said at the time that he had stressed the innocence of Thai nationals, and had been assured that they were being looked after.
Neighbouring Malaysia, which is a vocal supporter of Palestine and does not have diplomatic relations with Israel, has also taken part in the effort to get the Thai hostages released. 
Sunan Chombua, whose son Komkrit Chombua, 29, was among those abducted, said he felt hopeful, but that no update had been given by Thai officials.
“Me and my wife are praying to hear good news,” he said. He had not received any communication from the Thai government, even after it was reported earlier this week that a deal had been reached by Israel and Hamas to release 50 hostages during a 4-day ceasefire, he said. “It’s quiet, no update. I haven’t had any update about my son, even from his friends or anywhere else.”
Komkrit, from Surin province, moved from his home in rural Thailand four years ago to work in Israel, and was initially employed in agriculture and later construction. He would send money back home to his family, and his wages helped his parents to build a new home.
On 7 October, a photograph shared online showed Komkri sitting on the floor, head bowed, among a group of hostages taken by Hamas.
Sunan said he was waiting for more information. “I wish they could release all Thai hostages,” he said.
Prior to the war, 30,000 Thai workers were employed in Israel, with about 5,000 working in areas close to the Gaza Strip. Many Thais move from poorer, rural areas of Thailand to work Israel, where the wages are several times higher.
Thailand’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said it welcomed deal that was agreed between Israel and Hamas earlier this week that will allow for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children who would be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire.
“Thailand fervently hopes that this momentum can be maintained so that the remaining hostages, which include Thai nationals, are released at the earliest opportunity. Thailand reiterates our strong call toward that end,” the ministry said.
Kanchana Patarachoke, spokesperson for Thailand’s ministry of foreign affairs, said on Thursday that Thailand had not receive any information regarding whether Thais would be released as part of the deal struck between Israel and Hamas, the Bangkok Post reported.
There is only one woman among the Thai hostages, Kanchana said.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Houthi attacks on Israel jeopardise Saudi peace efforts in Yemen
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 6:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 747 words
Byline: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor
Highlight: US reportedly willing to attack Houthi military sites unless Houthis release Israeli-linked ship seized on Sunday
Body


Advanced plans by Saudi Arabia to strike a peace deal with the Houthi rebels in Yemen are being jeopardised by Houthi attacks on Israel and this week’s seizure of an Israeli-linked commercial vessel in the Red Sea.
Saudi Arabia hopes it can maintain a firewall between the Yemen peace talks and the Houthis’ attacks on Israel, but in London and Washington there is pressure to redesignate the Houthis as a terrorist organisation, which would threaten any deal.
There are also reports that the US is willing to launch an attack on Houthi military sites in and around Yemen’s capital, Sana’a, as well as its port operations room, unless the ship seized on Sunday , the Galaxy Leader, is released.
Last week the Saudis summoned the official UN-recognised Yemen government for further talks in Riyadh to present a revised roadmap that would lead to foreign forces, including those from Saudi Arabia, leaving in six months. It includes a budget deal under which large sums would be transferred from the oil-rich south to the impoverished north, which is dominated by the Iranian-backed Houthis.
Critics of the deal claim it empowers the Houthis, but Saudi Arabia, eager to exit what has proved to be an ill-judged military intervention in Yemen’s civil war, wants to end its engagement as quickly as possible.
Saudi Arabia would also fund the payment of salaries to tens of thousands of unpaid government staff.
In two rounds of meetings, a multistage Saudi roadmap was outlined to the Presidential Leadership Council (PLC), the coalition representing the UN-backed Yemeni government based in Aden and opposed to the Houthis.
Houthi leaders, who have declared themselves part of an “axis of resistance” of Iran’s allies and proxies retaliating against Israel’s war with Hamas, are determined to show military solidarity with Palestinians in Gaza. A third round of cruise missiles fired from Yemen towards Israel were shot down on Thursday morning by a US destroyer.
Some regard the Houthi missiles and drones as symbolic displays of solidarity designed for a domestic Yemeni audience. However, international alarm grew on Sunday when in a sophisticated helicopter raid Houthi fighters hijacked the Galaxy Leader. The 25-strong crew of the Japanese-managed ship, which includes 17 Filipinos, had been on a journey from Egypt to India.
The ship is ultimately owned by the Israeli billionaire Abraham Ungar but the plea to release the crew is being led by Japan.
The Houthis say they will target not just Israeli ships but those that protect Israeli ships in the narrow Bab-el-Mandeb strait and the Red Sea. The threat shows how Houthi entrenchment in Yemen, including at the strategic port of Hodeidah, could represent a long-term threat to western shipping interests in the region.
On 8 November the Houthis used an Iranian Khordad-3 air defence system to down a US drone.
The US national security council spokesperson John Kirby said this week: “In light of the recent targeting of civilians by the Houthis, and now the piracy of a ship in international waters, we have begun a review of potential terrorist designations and we’ll be considering other options together with our allies and partners as well.”
Yemen’s war began when the Houthis descended from their strongholds in northern Yemen and seized Sana’a in 2014, forcing the internationally recognised government to flee to the south and then into exile in Saudi Arabia. Riyadh intervened in 2015. More than 250,000 people are thought to have died as a result of the conflict.
Saudi efforts to strike a peace deal with the Houthis are aggravated by parts of the PLC opposing its terms on the grounds that the deal would not retain enough funds in the country’s south. The deal would lead to the country’s two central banks and currencies being unified. A military buffer zone between north Yemen and Saudi Arabia would also be established. Discussions on a separate state for the south would be held later.
The PLC has strongly condemned the Houthi piracy, while the Houthi leader, Abdulmalik al-Houthi, said it was laughable that the US was claiming to uphold international law.
The US may also reactivate the Combined Maritime Forces to protect commercial ships in international trade lanes in the Red Sea.
On Monday, the commander of the Houthi coastal defence forces, Muhammad al-Qadiri, warned against “any foreign interference in Yemen’s territorial waters or islands”, saying there would be “an appropriate response to any step of this kind”.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Explainer: have people fleeing the Hamas-Israel war for Australia been through security checks?
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 8:09 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1071 words
Byline: Amy Remeikis
Highlight: About 800 Palestinians and more than 1,700 Israeli citizens have been granted temporary visas. How does this work?Get our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


The federal government has approved more than 800 visas for Palestinians to come to Australia. The announcement has attracted criticism from the opposition over concerns the cohort poses a security risk.
The government says all Palestinians offered temporary Australian visas have undergone the necessary security checks. The same checks have been applied to the more than 1,700 Israeli citizens who have been granted temporary visas.
The visa application process is complex and confusing. Not all details are made public for security reasons. Here’s what we know so far.
                   What sort of visa has been granted?                   
The visa offered to Palestinians and Israeli citizens wanting to come to Australia is not a permanent visa. It’s a visitor visa, subclass 600, which allows for temporary entry for up to 12 months. In most cases, people will live with family in Australia. Between 7 October and 20 November, 1,793 visas were granted to Israeli citizens and 860 to Palestinians. 
                   Is it only during war that this happens?                   
No. Visas requests from conflict zones may receive priority, and there may be an increase to the number Australia would usually accept, but these visas exist as part of Australia’s visa system and have not been specially created.
                   Has this happened before?                   
Yes. Most recently, the former Coalition government granted 3,000 visitor visas to Ukrainian citizens  between 23 February to 11 March 2022, after the Russian invasion. The Morrison government also approved 5,000 temporary visas for Afghans  between 18 August and 20 September 2021, after the US withdrawal from the country and the return of the Taliban to power.
                   Can anyone get a visa?                   
No. There are still strict character, security and identity checks which must be undertaken as part of the visitor visa process, even for children.
Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup
The character checks can be found here , but there are additional security checks which are undertaken which are not as public. Those security checks vary in their thoroughness depending on which country or region the person applying is associated with, or lives in. 
For example, someone applying from Britain will not have a lower level of security check as someone applying from Syria, Iran or Palestine.
                   What is Peter Dutton saying?                   
The opposition leader, Peter Dutton,has raised concerns over whether enough time has passed for those checks to have taken place when it comes to approving Palestinian visas. On Friday, Dutton said:
“We have a big humanitarian program; happy for that to continue, and it may well include people coming out of the Middle East, but at the moment, to take people out of Gaza, through a desktop search from a person in Canberra in the Immigration Department, without the requisite security checks being undertaken is reckless and it’s also dangerous.
“You can’t be taking people out of a war zone and bring them to Australia without the checks being conducted and it’s obvious that the government hasn’t done it because they’ve got to go to the US – by way of one example – to their database holdings, who have the most significant database holdings in terms of biometrics and in terms of those people who have been flagged in the Middle East as being of concern.”
Dutton claims he is able to speak on this with authority because as a former minister for home affairs, he knows how the procedure works and how long the checks can take.
                   What has the government said?                   
The prime minister, Anthony Albanese, and the foreign minister, Penny Wong, have strongly rejected Dutton’s claims.  As has the home affairs minister, Clare O’Neil, who accused Dutton of attempting to stoke fears for political gain.
“National security is the first priority of our government. As security agencies have repeatedly warned, inflammatory language has a direct link to increased risk of violence. Everyone in our parliament needs to consider the impact that their language will have,” she said.
                   What checks have been done?                   
Every applicant undergoes a series of checks, including with security agencies, before a visa is granted. Those checks include criminal records, aliases, known associates, checks of their family and a character test. For a visa to be approved, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has to have assessed that the applicant is not a direct or indirect security risk.
For Asio to come to that decision, it is not just Australian databases which are relied upon. Australia is a member of Five Eyes, which includes the UK, the US, Canada and New Zealand and also has strategic relationships with Asean countries, which gives Australia access to security partner databases.
Amnesty International Australia’s refugee rights adviser, Dr Graham Thom, said   “in line with the variance and complexity within Australia’s visa system, Palestinians seeking entry to Australia are already subject to comprehensive assessment and robust security checks. While the government keeps the specifics of those checks confidential, Australia’s membership to the Five Eyes Alliance indicates the vast scope of intelligence that the government can consider when issuing visas.”
                   Have the Palestinian visas been approved faster than usual?                   
There is no evidence of that.
Palestinians also have more identity documents to hand than other groups seeking to escape a conflict zone, because of the unique situation of life in Gaza and the West Bank, which requires passage through Israeli check points. A lot of the information Australian authorities require has already been gathered.
Visas are also routinely provided to family members who meet eligibility criteria, which has been the case under all Australian governments.
It is also important to note that being granted a visa does not mean someone can automatically leave Gaza. Citizens still have to be able to cross from Gaza into Egypt and this has proven very difficult in many cases. So far, only 127 Australian citizens, permanent residents and family members have been able to cross the border. Another 69 Australians have sought to leave, but have so far been unable to.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Afternoon Update: Lehrmann denies trying to get Higgins drunk; Israel-Hamas truce begins; and calls for domestic violence inquiry
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 6:09 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1058 words
Byline: Antoun Issa
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Afternoon Update here, and start your day with our Morning Mail newsletter
Body


Good afternoon. Bruce Lehrmann faced cross examination today in day three of his defamation trial against Network Ten and Lisa Wilkinson.
The network’s barrister, Matt Collins KC, played extensive CCTV footage of Lehrmann and Brittany Higgins socialising at a bar on the night she alleged he raped her at Parliament House. Lehrmann has always denied the rape allegation and pleaded not guilty in a criminal trial that was later aborted.
In Friday’s hearing, Collins asserted Lehrmann had tried to get Higgins drunk, to which Lehrmann replied, “no, I wasn’t”. Read the full report.
                   Top news                                                                   Sydney school strike for Palestine | Hundreds of school students have defied politicians  to attend a rally for Palestine at Sydney Town Hall. The protest comes a day after a similar student rally in Melbourne. “I want to use my voice for those children in Gaza who are not able to pursue their education and whose basic human rights have been stolen from them,” said  Jaseena, a year 12 student who attended the protest.                                                                     Israel-Hamas ceasefire                            | Clocks have ticked past 7am in Israel , when a truce with Hamas was due to begin. The agreement is intended to lead to the release of dozens of hostages held by militants as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel. Just after 7am local time, sirens in Israel had warned of potential rockets, but there was no immediate confirmation  of any attacks. Earlier, Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, had said  the military will resume fighting in Gaza “with intensity” for at least two more months once the “short” temporary pause ends.                                                                                                            Banks vow to block transfers to suspect accounts | Consumer groups have long lobbied for institutions  to crack down on scams by rejecting transfers if the name and bank details of recipient don’t match. A similar measure was introduced in the UK in 2020 and it resulted in a 35% reduction in misdirected payments in the first year.                                                                     Calls for urgent royal commission into domestic violence | Advocates are calling for a national royal commission  after the deaths of four women in one week. Leesa Hooker, a family violence researcher at La Trobe University, said a royal commission examining the issue at a national level would be a “fabulous start”. “It is a crisis,” Hooker said.                                                                                                           Giant red pumpkin sculpture unveiled on Mornington Peninsula | Australia’s first big polka dot pumpkin  by Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama has been unveiled at Pt Leo Estate on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula. The three-metre-wide red-and-black gourd has been installed with a view of the sea, its design a famed example of the globally renowned artist’s work.                                                                     Labor criticised over ‘lack of urgency’ on environment laws | Australia’s major conservation organisations have taken the Albanese government  to task over what they say is a lack of urgency on environmental reform. In a 6 September letter to environment minister Tanya Plibersek, released to Guardian Australia under freedom of information laws, the groups also expressed serious concern about some of the reforms under consideration.                                                                                                           Taiwan says Australian warship sailed through sensitive Taiwan Strait | Taiwan’s military says it kept watch as an Australian warship sailed through  the sensitive and narrow waterway that separates the island from China. The incident comes after a maritime altercation between Chinese and Australian warships off Japan’s coast last week that injured navy divers.                                                                     Violent protests in Dublin | Buses and trams have been torched  and a shop looted during riots in central Dublin after a stabbing attack outside a school left three children injured. A crowd chanting anti-immigrant slogans clashed with police hours after the incident. The garda commissioner, Drew Harris, said a “complete lunatic faction driven by far-right ideology” was behind the disorder.                                                           In pictures                   
                     Mozambique’s Mário Macilau wins James Barnor prize                   
This year’s winner of the James Barnor prize, which supports photography talent on the African continent and among the wider African diaspora, is Mário Macilau. Here is a selection  from three series of his work in Mozambique.
                   What they said …                   
***
“There are no plans from the government to introduce across the public sector a four-day working week and we’ll continue to negotiate with the public sector union.” – Jacinta Allan, Victorian premier
The Community and Public Sector Union has made  a formal pilot program for a reduced-hours, four-day work week across various worksites a key part of its enterprise bargaining negotiations with the government.
                   In numbers                   
Pollution caused twice as many  premature deaths as previously thought.
                   Before bed read                   
“My recently widowed sister wants me to confront her husband’s unfaithful past. What to do?” – a reader asked our advice columnist, Eleanor Gordon-Smith.
Gordon-Smith wrote in reply: “Attending to old wounds can turn us into forensic examiners of the past, picking up previous slights with tweezers, illuminating and studying them.” Read the full advice column.
                   Daily word game                   
Today’s starter word is: HEAL.  You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. 
                   Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know. Sign up for our Morning Mail newsletter here.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




First Thing: Four-day ceasefire begins but IDF says ‘war is not over yet’
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 11:33 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1882 words
Byline: Nicola Slawson
Highlight: Mediator Qatar says operations room in Doha will monitor the truce. Plus: the upward trajectory of the far right in Europe
Body


Good morning.
The ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas came into effect this morning , before the expected release of the first group of Israeli hostages held by the militant Islamist organisation in return for Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.
Underlining the fragility of the fourday pause in hostilities, an alert sounded in Israel at 7.15am local time warning of a possible incoming rocket from Gaza targeting a village in southern Israel.
The diplomatic breakthrough, delayed by 24 hours, marks the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and offers some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.
Officials in Qatar, which has played a leading role as an intermediary, said an operations room there will monitor the truce and the release of hostages from Gaza. It has direct and realtime lines of communication with Israel, the Hamas political office in Doha and the ICRC, said Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for Qatar’s foreign ministry.
                                                                                        What has the IDF said about the ceasefire? “The war is not over yet,” the Israeli military spokesman Avichay Adraee has said in a message in Arabic  to Palestinian civilians in Gaza. In a post on X, formerly Twitter, he said: “The humanitarian pause is temporary. The northern Gaza Strip is a dangerous warzone and it is forbidden to move north. For your safety, you must remain in the humanitarian zone in the south.”                                                                                          When will hostages be released? The exchange of female and child hostages and prisoners was due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out during 24 hours of frantic diplomacy. Sources close to the negotiations said Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.                                                                                Axl Rose, Jamie Foxx, Eric Adams: flurry of last-minute claims gives sex abuse law powerful legacy                                      
New York’s year-long “look-back” window on sexual assault closed last night  after a flurry of last-minute claims against high-profile figures including the singer Axl Rose, the actor Jamie Foxx and the mayor of New York City, Eric Adams.
Some of the alleged incidents date back decades, in claims that would otherwise have fallen outside the statute of limitations.
The New York State law, which allowed adult sexual abuse survivors to sue their abusers beyond the statute of limitations for the course of one year, led to approximately 2,500 claims. It closed at midnight on Thursday.
It grabbed headlines immediately when the writer E Jean Carroll restated a rape and defamation claim against Donald Trump mere minutes after the look-back window opened.
                                                                                        Was the window a success? Beyond a year-long supply of headlines featuring high-profile names, many say that the adult survivors’ window, signed into law in May last year by the New York governor, Kathy Hochul, may not have lasted long enough to address all the potential claims by survivors. It was noted that many victims do not have powerful law firms behind them with a possible settlement award at the end of the process.                                                           
The North Korean dictator, Kim Jong-un, has celebrated a “new era of a space power”  with his family including daughter Ju-ae and the scientists who put the North’s first spy satellite into orbit. Pyongyang’s launch of the Malligyong-1 on Tuesday was its third attempt after failures in May and August.
Images released by Pyongyang showed Kim praising scientists and space program workers at the National Aerospace Technology Administration (Nata) while accompanied by Ju-ae.
Wearing a black leather coat, a grinning Kim was seen waving at the uniformed workers, all of whom appeared to be enthusiastically cheering him and Ju-ae.
                                                                                        Was the launch actually successful? South Korea confirmed the launch was successful but said it was too early to determine if the satellite was functioning as claimed by the North. After Tuesday’s launch, South Korea partially suspended a five-year-old military accord with the North  and deployed “surveillance and reconnaissance assets” to the border.                                                                                In other news …                                                                                                           A car crash at the US-Canada border that killed two people, injured a border officer and jangled nerves                         at the start of the busy Thanksgiving holiday travel period is not believed to be terrorism , according to the FBI. CNN, citing FBI officials, reported that the car was a Bentley and the driver believed to be from western New York State.                                                                                          The family farming company of a Republican candidate for the US Senate was found liable on Tuesday in a plot to fix the price of eggs.   Rose Acre Farms, which claims to be the second-largest egg producer in the country was accused in a civil suit of cutting supply to raise prices.                                                                                          South Africa’s former Paralympic star Oscar Pistorius, jailed in 2014 for killing his girlfriend, Reeva Steenkamp, will get another chance for an early release  at a parole hearing tomorrow.  Pistorius shot and killed Steenkamp on Valentine’s Day in 2013.                                                                                          Buses and trams have been torched and a shop looted during riots in Dublin city centre after                         three children were injured in a stabbing attack outside a school.                          Police and politicians called for calm  amid warnings against misinformation as violence escalated from a demonstration that began yesterday.                                                                                Help us raise $1.5m to fund independent journalism in 2024                                      
As we head into 2024, the Guardian’s journalists are already hard at work preparing for one of the most consequential news cycles of our lifetimes. We need your support to raise $1.5m to fund our reporting into areas such as: the 2024 election and the potential for another Donald Trump presidency; the ongoing war in the Middle East; the sweeping implications of artificial intelligence; the climate crisis; and investigations into high-stakes abuses of power. If you value our reporting, please make a year-end gift today.  We’re depending on you.
                                        Stat of the day: Nearly 40% of conventional baby food contains toxic pesticides, US study finds                                      
Nearly 40% of conventional baby food products analyzed in a US study were found to contain toxic pesticides , while none of the organic products sampled in the survey contained the chemicals. The research, conducted by the Environmental Working Group (EWG) not-for-profit, looked at 73 products and found at least one pesticide in 22 of them. Many products showed more than one pesticide.
“Babies and young children are particularly vulnerable to the health risks posed by pesticides in food – and food is the way most children will be exposed to pesticides,” co-author of the report Sydney Evans said.
                                        Don’t miss this: Geert Wilders’ victory confirm                     ed                                      
Geert Wilders’ shock victory in the Dutch general election confirms the upward trajectory of Europe’s populist and far-right parties, which – with the occasional setback – are continuing their steady march into the mainstream, writes Jon Henley. There is no guarantee that Wilders, whose anti-Islam Party for Freedom (PVV) won 37 seats in Wednesday’s ballot – more than twice its 2021 total – will be able to form a government with a majority in the Netherlands’ 150-seat parliament.
From Helsinki to Rome and Berlin to Brussels, far-right parties are climbing steadily up the polls , shaping the policies of the mainstream right to reflect their nativist and populist platforms, and occupying select ministerial roles in coalition governments.
                                        Climate check: US coal power plants killed at least 460,000 people in past 20 years – report                                      
Coal-fired power plants killed at least 460,000 people in the US during the past two decades , causing twice as many premature deaths as previously thought, new research has found. Cars, factories, fire smoke and electricity plants emit tiny toxic air pollutants known as fine particulate matter or PM2.5, which elevate the risk of an array of life-shortening medical conditions including asthma, heart disease, low birth weight and some cancers. Researchers analyzed Medicare and emissions data from 1999 and 2020, and for the first time found that coal PM2.5 was twice as deadly as fine particle pollutants from other sources. Previous studies quantifying the death toll from air pollution assumed all PM2.5 sources posed the same risk, and therefore likely underestimated the dangers of coal-powered plants.
                                        Last Thing: Conservators remove ‘Kylie Jenner treatment’ from 17th-century portrait                                      
If you think the modern influencer’s penchant for big lips reflects a beauty fad, then think again. According to English Heritage, a painting within the charity’s collection of a Jacobean “beauty” has been found to have received the so-called “Kylie Jenner treatment”  – with touch-ups involving plumping the sitter’s lips and lowering her hairline. Now, hours of painstaking conservation has revealed the true face of Diana Cecil, a 17th-century noblewoman, who was regarded as one of the great beauties of her time – but whose appearance had been changed for centuries.
“Arbitrary and ever-changing beauty standards do seem to echo through the ages, although in this case Diana had no say in the ‘improvements’ made to her portrait centuries after it was painted,” said Louise Cooling, English Heritage’s curator at Kenwood.
                                        Sign up                                      
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. 
                                        Get in touch                                      
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




‘We are overwhelmed’: southern Gaza’s exhausted doctors forced to leave children to die
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 5:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1223 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: A surgeon at one of the territory’s last functioning hospitals tells of desperate conditions amid an acute lack of medicineIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


In the crowded corridors of the European hospital in Khan Younis, exhausted doctors decide who among the huge influx of patients arriving from the north of Gaza  should live or die.
Hundreds of casualties have moved south in recent days after the evacuation of hospitals in Gaza City, overwhelming medical staff already struggling with an acute lack of medicine, diminishing food rations and intermittent power and communications. 
Injured people have joined thousands of displaced people seeking shelter and safety in medical facilities.
Paul Ley, an orthopaedic surgeon at the European hospital, said displaced people were sleeping in lifts, a small team was working round the clock in four operating theatres to amputate limbs infected after days without treatment, and there was an acute shortage of painkillers. Triage decisions had to be made instantly which, in one case, meant leaving a 12-year-old child to die with only palliative care in order to preserve dwindling resources.
Ley said the hospital had received 500 patients evacuated from hospitals in northern Gaza in recent days.
“Many have not received treatment for nine or 10 days because hospitals there were non-functional even if they were open,” he said. “This is the situation that is happening here now. This is a functioning hospital but we are being overwhelmed. There is nowhere to evacuate to … There is no escape route. We are probably one of the last lines of defence.”
There was no independent confirmation of Ley’s account, but details match the accounts of other medical staff, as well as reporters in Gaza. Ley sent pictures of some of the injuries he described to the Guardian.
Israel launched its offensive on Gaza after Hamas, the extremist Islamist group which runs the territory, killed more than 1,200 people in southern Israel, mostly civilians in their homes or at a dance party, in an attack on 7 October.
Since then, more than 14,000 people have been killed in Gaza, most of them women or children, according to Palestinian officials.
In the burns unit of the European hospital are 78 patients, nearly two-fifths of them children under five.
“I have never seen anything like it,” said Ley a 60-year-old French citizen who arrived in Gaza with a team from the International Committee of the Red Cross almost four weeks ago. “I have been in many war contexts where the type of wounds are the same but the number is huge. We never leave the hospital. We work round the clock.”
Hospital staff hope the four- or five-day ceasefire between Israel and Hamas, due to begin on Friday, may lead to a durable end to hostilities – or at least the opportunity to receive supplies of humanitarian aid. However, they also fear the arrival of more patients as injured casualties are evacuated from northern Gaza during any pause.
Many of the casualties arriving at the hospital were injured days before, meaning wounds have become infected. Ley said some people’s dressings had not been changed for 10 days, so their wounds were full of worms. In other cases, surgeons were forced to amputate limbs that may otherwise have been saved.
Another problem is a lack of anaesthetics and painkillers.
“We do operations with minimal anaesthesia. If we run out, we can’t operate but there is no clear line. There are a lot of people crying, screaming with pain, but we don’t have enough analgesics. We keep them for the kids or very severe cases. [So] normally we would change dressings on patients with 40% burns with them under sedation and minimise the time by using more attendants … [Now] it has to be done with a lot of pain.”
In the grounds of the hospital compound, thousands of desperate families are packed into wooden or cardboard shelters. Israeli airstrikes have not targeted the hospital and respected the zone around the facility – though shrapnel has struck the building, and the blast from bombing has shattered windows.
Israeli military officials say they make every effort to avoid civilian casualties and observe international law. They say Hamas is using Gaza’s 2.3 million inhabitants as a human shield and claim to have found evidence of Hamas military facilities in or under hospitals, schools and homes. 
On Thursday, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said: “The whole laws of war, humanitarian law, which we’re committed to completely, makes a simple distinction … They say on one line are combatants, and the other line are non-combatants. You can target the combatants … but don’t deliberately target the non-combatants. They can be hurt, unintentionally. That accompanies every legitimate war.
“[Hamas] deliberately implant themselves in hospitals, in schools, in residential areas, in UN facilities. They fire their rockets from there. Thousands of them. They deliberately target civilians and they deliberately hide behind civilians and use them as a human shield. That’s a war crime.”
Elsewhere in Khan Younis, tens of thousands of people have crowded into shelters run by the UN. In one, a vocational training centre before the war, more than 35,000 people share 48 toilets and four showers, administrators there told the Guardian this week.
“Conditions are appalling. All the children are getting sick with coughs or stomach problems. There are fights over sleeping spaces and food,” said an administrator, who did not have authority to talk to the media.
Since the Hamas attacks on 7 October, Israel has imposed an almost total blockade of Gaza. Food supplies from the UN have dwindled to about a kg of flour and a single tin of tuna or beans each day, one administrator said, leaving families to survive on flat “bread cakes” made of flour and water cooked on scavenged metal sheets over open fires.
“There is no food in the shops and no fuel. Even wood is rare and expensive, so people are chopping down trees in the streets. Salt is really rare. No one has any and if you have a bit, you can trade it for a lot of food,” the administrator said.
Ley said the hardest thing for doctors was to make triage decisions. “We do our triage … [asking] are we going to take this patient because they will have a good chance of surviving rather than doing desperate measures on a patient who will die in two or three days? That sounds nice on paper, but when you have to make the decision it is different. There’s a 12-year-old with 90% burns so we won’t treat him except for pain control that is not enough,” he said.
“We try to keep our heads cool and steady, but for local staff this is their families, friends, their people. They never want to amputate. They say: ‘I can’t do it any more’ and so I say: ‘OK I will do it, don’t worry,’ and you can feel the relief”.
Ley said he had been shocked at how passive many patients were, such as one 35-year-old woman whose husband and children had been killed when the family’s home was destroyed, and who appeared unmoved when told both her legs would need to be amputated. “So many just don’t care any more,” he said.
But amid the devastation, there were moments of slender hope. Recently, Ley treated a 32-year-old man with shrapnel injuries to his abdomen, left leg and a “fist-sized hole” in his right forearm. The patient’s young sister thanked Ley, saying she was proud of her brother and happy he was alive. She wanted to be a surgeon whens she was older, she said.
“So that was very poignant,” Ley said.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




‘Proudly marked absent’: hundreds of school students protest in Sydney in support of Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 5:57 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:2
Length: 522 words
Byline: Mostafa Rachwani
Highlight: Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi says she is ‘proud’ of the protesters after NSW education minister says it is not a valid reason to miss schoolFollow our Australia news live blog for latest updatesGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


Hundreds of students have defied politicians and rallied at Town Hall in Sydney in support of Palestine.
A raucous, bouncing crowd chanted, whooped and cheered amid speeches that called for an end to the bombardment of Gaza and for a free Palestine.
Holding signs such as “proudly marked absent today” and “get in, we’re freeing Gaza”, the students of all ages demanded political leaders call for a ceasefire.
Organiser and speaker Noura told the crowd the strike was called in solidarity with the students of Gaza who have seen the school year cancelled amid Israel’s bombardment.
“The students of Sydney strike today in solidarity with the Palestinian people, because we will not be bystanders.”
“The schools in Gaza have been shut down by force due to the bombing … so today we walked out of our school in solidarity with the children of Gaza, we stand with them.”
Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi said she was “proud” of young people in Australia, after a similar school strike was held yesterday in Melbourne.
“I am so honoured to be among you, you give me hope for the future. You inspire me every single day, you will know what is right and what is wrong and you are on the right side of history,” she said to cheers from the students.
“Your education is working really well because it has brought you out here today. It has taught you how to think for yourself. It has taught you the difference between right and wrong.”
A number of speakers referred to criticisms of the strike issued by politicians, including NSW premier Chris Minns and state education minister Prue Carr, who said going to a protest was “not a reason to be wagging today”.
“One of the most important ways you can change the world is get an education,” she said.
“You will be marked absent if you go to the protest, it’s not a reason to be wagging school today.
“You need to go to school.”?
But grinning students told Guardian Australia they had “jigged for a good cause”, with one year 12 student, Khidash, saying it was important they stood up against what was happening in Gaza.
“I’m proud that I came here today with my friends, fellow students, cousins, ex’s and crushes. We jigged for a good cause.
“The Department of Education should know how important this is to us, especially after seeing how many students are absent today,” he said.
Many arrived draped in the traditional Palestinian scarf, the keffiyeh, and holding Palestinian flags aloft.
Students of all ages attended, with many coming from primary school as well as high schools, and marched their way through Sydney’s CBD.
Year 12 student Zahra said she was proud to be marked absent today, and that she was watching the war in Gaza daily and felt she had to do something.
“Every day we see these atrocities, we can’t sit back and be silent. Why would I sit in a classroom when I can come today and make history with my brother and sisters?
“Chris Minns and his fellow politicians are the ones who need to get educated,” she added. “Me and other students at my school don’t stand for what is happening, we are going to stand in solidarity no matter what.
“Our absence today is a big message, we won’t be silenced.”

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Friday briefing: What now after Geert Wilders’ surprise success in the Dutch election
The Guardian (London)
November 24, 2023 Friday 6:46 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 2881 words
Byline: Nimo Omer
Highlight: In today’s newsletter: The hard-right populist’s party won a startling number of seats in this week’s election – can he take power? Sign up here for our daily newsletter, First Edition
Body


Good morning. Earlier this week Dutch voters cast their ballots in a knife-edge snap election following the collapse of prime minister Mark Rutte’s coalition government in July. The results surprised many. The anti-Islam, anti-EU populist politician Geert Wilders and his Party for Freedom (PVV) snagged 37 seats in the 150-seat  parliament. That might not sound like a lot but the outgoing centre-right party leading the last government had 34 seats after the previous election.
Even Wilders himself, not known for self-doubt, was surprised that his party won that many seats. The results have placed the hard-right PVV firmly ahead of any other party, but still below the threshold for an outright majority. The Netherlands finds itself in a political dilemma: how does a country traditionally ruled by coalitions form a functioning government when most other major political parties have previously declared they will not work with the PVV?
The left-wing bloc, led by Frans Timmerman, came second with 25 seats, while the centre-right People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) was decimated, trailing in third with 24 seats.
For today’s newsletter, I spoke with Jon Henley, the Guardian’s Europe correspondent, about what this shock result means for Dutch politics – and what it says about the presence of far-right populist politics in Europe.
                   Five big stories                   
                                            Israel-Hamas war  | The four-day ceasefire in Gaza  between Israel and Hamas came into effect on Friday at 7am, ahead of the expected release of the first group of Israeli hostages held by the militant Islamist organisation in return for Palestinians imprisoned by Israel. The diplomatic breakthrough, delayed by 24 hours, marks the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza.
                                            Monarchy  | A Guardian investigation can reveal that the king is profiting from the deaths of thousands of people in the north-west of England whose assets are secretly being used to upgrade a commercial property empire  managed by his hereditary estate. For more stories on royal wealth and finances, read the Cost of the Crown. 
                                            Artificial intelligence | OpenAI was reportedly working on an advanced system before Sam Altman’s sacking that was so powerful it caused safety concerns among staff. Alarmed researchers wrote to the board of directors warning it could threaten humanity, Reuters reported. 
                                            Ireland  | Buses and trams were torched and a shop looted during riots in Dublin’s city centre after three young children and a woman were injured in a stabbing attack.  Police detained a man in his 50s, who was also treated for injuries. The garda commissioner, Drew Harris, said a “complete lunatic faction driven by far-right ideology” was behind the disorder.
                                            Conservatives  |  David Cameron is facing further questions about whether he was paid by Chinese interests to promote a port development in Sri Lanka.  A video has emerged from two months ago where the former prime minister can be seen telling investors in Dubai that he wanted to “correct misapprehensions” about the project and quoted from a Chinese-funded study in support of the development.
                   In depth: ‘Wilders is determined to go into government – but it’s not going to be easy’                   
For over two decades, Geert Wilders has been a notorious figure in Dutch politics. His extremist views on Islam, immigration and the EU have earned him a criminal conviction and pushed him to the fringes, but he has remained a consistent presence among Europe’s far right.
Muslim organisations have expressed concern  about Wilders’ victory: he has described Islam as the “ideology of a retarded culture  ” and a “backward religion”, and the Qur’an as “fascist”. Wilders also has a conviction  for calling Moroccan people “ scum  ”.
Though Muslims make up about 5% of the population in the Netherlands, the PVV’s manifesto still includes a ban on mosques, the Qur’an and headscarves in government buildings. (In the run-up to the election, Wilders said that all policies will fall “within the law and constitution”.) Other policies he has promoted include holding a “ Nexit  ” referendum to get the Netherlands out of the EU, and cutting financial and military support for Ukraine.
After waiting in the wings for years, Wilders has found himself centre stage of political life in the Netherlands. Will he finally get his hands on power?
***
                     Will Geert Wilders be the next prime minister?                   
In short, probably not.
The Netherlands has one of the most fragmented multiparty political systems in Europe. In this election alone, voters could choose from 26 political parties, 18 of which could enter parliament. No party has won a majority of seats in parliament in over a century.
So what happens now? The leader of the largest party, in this case Wilders, has to see if he can form a majority coalition with other parties. The issue is that most of the major parties have already, unequivocally, ruled out forming a coalition with the PVV, particularly with Wilders as prime minister. “The last government took 271 days to form  and that was relatively straightforward compared to what Wilders is up against, especially as he has been shut out of Dutch politics for so long”, Jon says. Wilders is not oblivious to these difficulties and has acknowledged the coalition challenge, saying: “I call on the parties … Now we will have to look for agreements with each other.”
The only hope that remains for Wilders is the outgoing VVD party. During the campaign, the party’s leader, Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, said that she was keeping the door open to working  with Wilders. Critics said that she was legitimising Wilders and the PVV. The plan to scoop some of the PVV’s voters backfired and many now view the refusal to condemn Wilders as a terrible strategic mistake, but even Yesilgöz-Zegerius has said that she will not enter a coalition if Wilders is the prime minister. Either way, any coalition that includes the PVV will significantly dilute or completely abandon their most extreme policies.
There have also been strong suggestions that the VVD could enter negotiations with Wilders, only to pull out after three to four months, collapsing the process and forcing another election. The other option is some kind of deal where the PVV is outside the coalition but provides parliamentary support in exchange for their policies being put on the agenda as well.
And finally, there is, in theory, a possibility that all three major political parties, the VVD, the leftwing bloc, and the NSC, alongside other parties, could form a government. “So there are a few constellations that are theoretically possible, but they are all impractical”, Jon says.
“Wilders is clearly determined this time to go into government and, with such a large victory, it is going to be hard to deny”, Jon says. “But that doesn’t mean that it’s going to be easy for him”.
***
                     The far-right in Europe                   
Far-right parties across Europe have been “delighted” by the result, Jon says. Populist leaders have congratulated Wilders:  Hungary’s far-right prime minister, Viktor Orbán, prematurely announced Wilders’ victory, adding that the results showed “the winds of change are here!”. France’s Marine Le Pen said that Wilders’ shock win “confirms the growing attachment to the defence of national identities”. And Belgian far-right leader Tom Van Grieken proclaimed that “parties like ours are coming all over Europe!”.
Like Wilders, these leaders have managed to gain more support by diversifying their list of grievances: “For a long time the far-right hobby horse was immigration, Islam and the EU. They’ve added to that fears and concerns about the cost of living crisis, about the green transition and about the cost of the war in Ukraine”, Jon says. One person told the Guardian their reason for voting for the PVV was mainly about the cost of living: “While he said enough is enough he is right, enough is enough. We pay too much tax, too much for healthcare, too much for rent. We can’t take it any more.” 
Regardless of whether Wilders is able to form a coalition, his win confirms that “the far right is on an upward curve, with occasional setbacks”, Jon says. Despite recent losses in Spain  and Poland , generally the far right has been gaining ground all over Europe: in Italy , Finland , Sweden , Austria  and Greece.  Many parties will look at this result as confirmation that the political winds are going in their favour.
                   What else we’ve been reading                                                               Before Ridley Scott became the latest film-maker to take on this colossus, how was Napoleon represented in art? Jonathan Jones reviews  portraits by David, Gros and Turner – by turns heroic, majestic and isolated in defeat.Clare Longrigg, acting head of newsletters                                                                                          Emine Saner profiles  Britain’s new Strictly fan favourite: Bobby Brazier, son of the late reality star Jade Goody who is dancing his way through this year’s show. Saner explores the secret to his success: his genuine nature.Nyima Jobe, newsletters team                                                                 “You don’t stop feeling those things just because you’re old.” Sophie Elmhirst tells the intimate and moving story  of a romance in a care home.Clare                                                                 In this week’s Ranked column, it’s all the greatest songs produced by Stock Aitken Waterman. From Donna Summer to Dead or Alive, Alexis Petridis has your ready-made weekend playlist here. Nyima                                                                 It’s so hard to recollect what being a teenager is like, especially when you have teenage children, but Zadie Smith’s account in the New Yorker  (£) of a dramatic fall from her bedroom window when she was 17 draws us into a meditation on teenage energy, misery and time.Clare                                                           Sport                   
                       Football | A hat-trick from Sam Kerr guided Chelsea to a 4-1 victory over a stubborn Paris FC at Stamford Bridge.  The striker opened the scoring in the first half before the visitors levelled through Théa Gréboval. Two second-half goals in seven minutes from the Australian, however, ensured Chelsea earned a crucial three points.
                       Tennis | Novak Djokovic, pictured, accused a vocal set of British fans of showing him “disrespect” throughout his match as he closed out Serbia’s 2-0 Davis Cup win over Great Britain  by defeating Cameron Norrie 6-4, 6-4. “Learn how to respect players, learn how to respect people, you shut up, you be quiet ,” he said.
                       Football | Wasim Haq has resigned  as a member of the Football Association council after saying “Adolf Hitler would be proud of Benjamin Netanyahu”. Haq said that his decision to step down was “the best course of action for the FA and myself” and reiterated that his comments were not aimed at the Jewish community.
                   The front pages                   
“Revealed: how the king secretly profits from dead citizens’ assets” is our Guardian splash this morning. The Times has “Migration figures pile pressure on PM to act” and the Daily Telegraph goes with “Cabinet pressure on Sunak to slash migration”. “Failure to halt migration is ‘slap in the face’ for public” – that’s the Daily Express which uses a head shot of Suella Braverman whom its headline quotes. “Suella leads Tory revolt on migration” – when the Daily Mail gets on first-name terms, you know it likes what it’s hearing. “Sunak under pressure as net immigration reaches record” says the Financial Times. “Make it stop” – the Daily Mirror says the Tories are “breaking Britain”, itemising what it casts as their failures on the economy, bills, migration and Covid. “Winches from death” – a dramatic Metro page one concentrates on the story of a worker being plucked by crane from a high-rise rooftop blaze in Reading. “Cabinet battle on UK’s migrant care workers” – that’s the i which says the Home Office wants a visa crackdown, the Department of Health doesn’t.
                   Something for the weekend                   
                     Our critics’ roundup of the best things to watch, read and listen to right now                   
                     TV Such Brave Girls (BBC Three)   Kat Sadler has been gathering the material for Such Brave Girls for most of her life. It is a loosely autobiographical sitcom in which she stars as Josie, who has a long history of depression, suicidal thoughts and poor mental health. The first couple of episodes don’t establish the characters or dynamics firmly enough and drag a little because the jokes are too far apart. However, there is a particular joy in seeing a woman-led, female-written show that doesn’t pull its punches and revels in plumbing the depths. Such Brave Girls is indeed brave – singular, fresh, scabrous and unflinching – but still – or, rather, as a result – hilarious.Lucy Mangan
                     Music M1onthebeat: The Mixtape  M1onthebeat’s first mixtape opens with an answering machine message: “I’m busy grafting making this happen,” he says. “History wasn’t made by those sitting there doing nothing.” The “this” is presumably the unexpected commercial rise of UK drill. It is now a genre that spawns chart-topping singles and albums, and it isn’t too self-aggrandising of the producer to suggest he has had an important role in it. The closing track on the debut mixtape Hear No Evil is striking partly because Kojey Radical and Knucks’s lyrics shift away from the preoccupations of drill, partly because of the addictive chorus courtesy of vocalist Miraa May. This mixtape deserves praise.Alexis Petridis
                     Film Napoleon  Many directors have tried following Napoleon where the paths of glory lead, and maybe it is only defiant defeat that is really glorious. But Ridley Scott  – the Wellington of cinema – has created an outrageously enjoyable cavalry charge of a movie, a full-tilt biopic of two and a half hours. Napoleon lives on for those who want to annul the horrors of the 20th century and revive what they take to be the romantic adventure of warfare. For Scott he doesn’t detain the audience with metaphysical meaning and certainly doesn’t withhold the old-fashioned pleasures of spectacle and excitement. Joaquin Phoenix is the key to it all: a performance as robust as the glass of burgundy he knocks back: preening, brooding, seething and triumphing.Peter Bradshaw
                     Podcast Heirs of Enslavement                        Clive Lewis MP’s ancestors were enslaved and former BBC journalist Laura Trevelyan’s were enslavers – and both want to confront the past. This podcast sees them travel to Grenada to meet Lewis’s dad and historian Nicole Phillip-Dowe, who helped Trevelyan’s family draft an apology to the country. Plenty of thought-provoking discussions follow.Hannah Verdier
                   Today in Focus                   
                     He’s back: Sam Altman and the chaos at the heart of the AI industry                   
The CEO of OpenAI was sacked and then rehired days later, after staff threatened to follow him elsewhere. But what does this corporate drama tell us about the future of AI? Blake Montgomery explains
                   Cartoon of the day | Ben Jennings                   The Upside                   
                     A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad                   
When Doctor Who first returned to our screens 20 years ago it wasn’t just the titular Doctor that was regenerated, it was the Welsh economy. According to a new report from the BBC, the show has contributed at least £134.6m in GVA  (gross value added) to the Welsh economy, created hundreds of jobs and acted as a catalyst for a dramatic growth in the country’s creative sector.
Russell T Davies, who was the showrunner for the first four revived series and has returned for three specials this autumn to celebrate the Doctor’s 60th anniversary , is proud of the impact it’s had on his home nation’s economy: “When people say, ‘Oh, a drama cost £2m’, what that means is £2m goes into Cardiff, £2m to the drivers and the office staff and the hospitality, the hotels, pubs, bars, supermarkets.”
The Welsh first minister, Mark Drakeford, is hoping for many more years: “The Doctor’s return has been a key driver in building the reputation of the Welsh screen industry. Here’s to many incarnations to come.”
Sign up here  for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday                   
                   Bored at work?                   
And finally, the Guardian’s puzzles are here to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow.
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword Wordiply

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war: Cubans protest in front of US embassy in Havana – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 5:32 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:42
Length: 20922 words
Byline: Helen Livingstone (now); Léonie Chao-Fong, Maya Yang, and Martin Belam (earlier)
Highlight: This blog has closed. You can follow our live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war here on our new blog
Body


block-time published-time 2.43am GMT 
This blog is closing, but you can follow our live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war and the expected ceasefire here on our new blog. 
block-time published-time 2.27am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images coming to us over the wires from Gaza.
    Palestinians fleeing to the southern Gaza Strip, on the outskirts of Gaza City. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      People search for victims among the rubble of buildings destroyed by Israeli airstrikes in the southern Gaza Strip city of Rafah. Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock      Palestinians sit amid the rubble of a house after an Israeli strike in Khan Younis, in the southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images      Israeli soldiers plant flags on armored military vehicles along Israel's border with the Gaza Strip. Photograph: Ohad Zwigenberg/AP      Ambulances on a road near an Israeli forces tank. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      
block-time published-time 2.01am GMT 
 Summary  
Here’s a recap of the latest developments, and our latest full report is here. 
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will beginat 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT), Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, has announced.  The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.The release of hostages is expected to follow on Friday afternoon. Israel and Hamas have exchanged lists of those to be released, with Hamas expected to free 13 women and children,  Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson Ansari said. He did not specify how many Palestinian women and children will be released on Friday or when this would take place. Israel has notified the families  of the hostages set to be released on Friday, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari said .Joe Biden said he has his “fingers crossed”  that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl will be released.Overall, Hamas has agreed to free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages it has held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October, under the terms of the agreement. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.In a separate agreement, Hamas is set to unconditionally release 23 Thai hostages it is holding in Gaza, according to a report by the Al-Araby Al-Jadeed news site.  The release of Thai hostages came after Iran-mediated talks , the outlet reported on Thursday.A special flight has evacuated 103 Russian nationals from Gaza , Russia’s emergencies ministry said early on Friday. In a post on Telegram, the ministry said the group flew to Moscow aboard a chartered Ilyushin-76 aircraft, Reuters reported. The post said 101 Russian nationals had been taken from Gaza to Egypt in the past 24 hours, bringing to more than 750 the total number of Russian evacuees. More than 650 had been flown to Russia, including more than 300 children.The exchange of Palestinian and Israeli female and child hostages and prisoners had been due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out. Sources close to the negotiations said  Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.The diplomatic breakthrough promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones.Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, has said the military will resume fighting against Hamas “with intensity” for at least two more months. Addressing Israeli troops on Thursday, Gallant instructed them to “organise…resupply arms,  and get ready to continue” during the “short” respite in fighting.Israel’s army arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital on Thursday, more than a week after it surrounded and raided the medical facility. Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said, amid reports  that the IDF had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy. The IDF confirmed Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. Just two doctors are left  at al-Shifa to treat the remaining estimated 200 patients, the hospital’s head of plastic surgery has said.Israeli forces bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians. Gaza’s health ministry said 27 people were killed in a strike on a school affiliated with the UN Palestinian refugee agency (UNRWA)  in Jabaliya refugee camp. The Palestinian Wafa news agency reported that dozens had been killed in Israeli bombing raids in Nuseirat and its camp in the central Gaza Strip, and in Jabaliya in the north. Among those reported killed in Nuseirat was a photojournalist, Mohammad Moin Ayyash, and his family.The IDF said it has killed the commander of Hamas’s naval forces in Khan Younis in an airstrike in the Gaza Strip.Amar Abu Jalalah was killed  along with another member of the Hamas naval forces, the IDF said in a statement on Thursday.More than 13,000 Palestinians have been recorded killed in Gaza since the war began, according to Gaza’s health ministry.  The director of the health ministry, which is run by the Hamas government, said another 6,000 people have been reported missing and are feared buried under the rubble. Israel’s assault on Gaza followed the Hamas attack on 7 October which killed at least 1,200 Israelis, mostly civilians.UK foreign secretary David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu during a visit to Israel, and expressed hope that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”. The Israeli prime minister told Cameron that the precondition for peace in the Middle East was the eradication of what he called the “genocidal terrorist cult” Hamas. His remarks gave the impression that Netanyahu is not currently interested in anything but a military solution  to the future of Israel’s security.Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians,  including thousands of children”.
block-time published-time 1.36am GMT 
A special flight has evacuated 103 Russian nationals from Gaza, Russia’s emergencies ministry said early on Friday.
In a post on Telegram, the ministry said the group flew to Moscow aboard a chartered Ilyushin-76 aircraft, Reuters reported.
The post said 101 Russian nationals had been taken from Gaza to Egypt in the past 24 hours, bringing to more than 750 the total number of Russian evacuees. More than 650 had been flown to Russia, including more than 300 children.
The Kremlin on Wednesday hailed a ceasefire agreement in Gaza, going into effect on Friday, as the “first good news for a long time” in the Israel-Palestinian conflict.
It said humanitarian pauses were the only way to build efforts for a sustainable settlement.
block-time published-time 12.55am GMT 
The director of al-Shifa hospital, Mohammad abu Salmiya, is not under inditement and has not been accused of being a member of Hamas, the Israeli military (IDF) has told the BBC.
As we reported earlier , Abu Salmiya and other medics from Gaza’s largest hospital were detained on Thursday and transferred to Israel’s Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. 
The IDF said that al-Shifa “under his direct management, served as a Hamas command and control centre” and that Hamas fighters had sought refuge in the hospital.
Meanwhile the medical director of the Indonesian hospital, Dr Marwan Sultan, told the BBC that the facility in northern Gaza was under heavy fire, with Israeli tanks firing every 15 minutes. He told the British broadcaster:
We cannot stay in rooms as windows are being hit. We are staying in corridors in the hospital. My office was targeted several times.
He said evacuation was not taking place over concerns staff could be detained.
block-time published-time 12.39am GMT 
The number of antisemitic and anti-Muslim hate crimes in Toronto, Canada’s largest city, has spiked significantly since the start of the Gaza conflict between Israel and Hamas on 7 October, authorities have said.
Police chief Myron Demkiw said 78 hate crimes had been reported between Oct. 7 and 20 November, compared to 37 in the same time frame in 2022, Reuters reported. The real number was undoubtedly higher since some people were hesitant to come forward, he added.
    Toronto skyline and Lake Ontario. Photograph: RM Nunes/Alamy   
The number of reported antisemitic hate crimes in this period almost trebled to 38 from 13 last year, while those involving the Muslim, Palestinian and Arab population leapt to 17 from just one in 2022.
“The impact of the events in the Middle East on our city are ongoing and have escalated since 7 October,” Demkiw told a televised news conference.
Since the Hamas raid and subsequent Israeli retaliation, 25 people have been arrested and 64 charges laid in relation to reported hate incidents.
"(Hate crimes) can traumatize not just victims, but all members of the targeted community and beyond,” said Demkiw. Toronto has temporarily boosted the size of its hate crime unit to 29 from the usual six.
With around three million people living in Toronto, it is by far the biggest city in Canada, which has a population of just over 40 million.
block-time published-time 12.14am GMT 
German police have raided the homes of members and supporters of Hamas and another Palestinian organisation which are banned in the country. AFP reports:
Around 500 members of the security forces led the operation, with 13 places searched in the capital Berlin, the interior ministry said.
Four other regions were targeted to a lesser extent as police seized smartphones, laptops and various writings, the ministry added.
“We are carrying out action against radical Islamists,” Interior Minister Nancy Faeser said earlier on Thursday.
“By banning Hamas and Samidoun in Germany, we have sent a clear signal that we will not tolerate any apology or support for Hamas’s barbaric terror against Israel.
“Islamists and ant-Semites must not feel safe anywhere,” she said.
Germany on 2 November banned Hamas and Samidoun. According to official figures, Germany hosts an estimated 450 members of Hamas, proscribed as a “terrorist” organisation by the European Union, the US and Israel.
The ministry said that while Hamas members had not staged “violent action” in Germany so far, they had tried to raise funds to help the group overseas and “influence the social and political discourse in Germany”.
It said Samidoun on the other hand was “prone to use violence... and denies the right of Israel to exist”.
     German police officers leave an apartment block during a raid against Hamas supporters in Berlin, Germany on Thursday. Photograph: Fabrizio Bensch/Reuters      
block-time published-time 12.03am GMT 
 130,000 litres of diesel to be delivered daily to Gaza during truce, Egypt says  
Egypt has said 130,000 litres of diesel and four trucks of gas will be delivered daily to Gaza when a four-day truce starts on Friday, according to Reuters.
Diaa Rashwan, the head of Egypt’s State Information Service (SIS), also said in a statement early on Friday that 200 trucks of aid would enter Gaza daily.
The truce is expected to start at 7am (0500 GMT).
block-time published-time 11.50pm GMT 
The Belgian city of Charleroi has condemned antisemitic vandalism after at least 85 Jewish graves in one of its cemeteries were damaged and objects stolen, AFP reports.
A gravedigger in a cemetery in the Marcinelle neighbourhood of the southern city discovered the damage in plots for Jewish tombs on Wednesday. An investigation has since been opened.
Paul Magnette, the mayor of Charleroi, said:
The place chosen and the theft of manystars of David leave little doubt on the antisemitic nature of the intentions.
In the name of the city, I fully condemn these abject acts.
He said he had asked the city’s administration to notify each family.
Only the cemetery’s Jewish section was affected, suggesting the antisemitic nature of the vandalism.
Belgium has registered a rise in reported antisemitic acts and comments since the outbreak of the Israel-Hamas war on 7 October.
Police are monitoring more closely Jewish schools and places of worship.
block-time published-time 11.35pm GMT 
Tens of thousands of Cubans have marched in front of the US embassy in Havana charging Israel was committing “genocide” against Palestinians in Gaza, Reuters reports.
The march, led by President Miguel Diaz-Canel, and which moved along Havana”s seaside drive, the Malecon, where the US diplomatic headquarters is located, was the first of its kind in more than a decade.
Former Cuban leader Fidel Castro, now deceased, was famous for staging similar, but much larger demonstrations to protest US sanctions and meddling in Cuban affairs.
The crowd, sporting Palestinian flags and banners, chanted “free, free Palestine, Israel is genocide” and “up with Palestinian freedom” as it marched by the building and rallied nearby.
    Cuba’s President Miguel Diaz-Canel (C), along other leaders, takes part in a march in support of the Palestinian people in Havana, on Thursday. Photograph: Yamil Lage/AFP/Getty Images   
Communist-run Cuba has been a strong backer of the Palestinian cause for decades and has trained more than 200 Palestinian doctors. It does not have diplomatic relations with Israel.
“We are here and it is no coincidence that we have marched in front of the United States embassy,” Anet Rodríguez, a university professor, said.
“The United States is one of the most responsible for supporting the State of Israel... it is supporting a massacre of the Palestinians and international laws are being violated,” she said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.36pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.23pm GMT 
The Israeli military says it is investigating after a 12-year-old boy was shot dead near the West Bank city of Nablus on Wednesday, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz has reported.
The army said in a statement that soldiers had opened fire on “rioters” who threw stones during an “operation” in the town of Beita. “Thereafter, it was reported that a Palestinian minor have been killed. The incident is being investigated,” it said.
This is Helen Livingstone taking over from my colleague Léonie Chao-Fong.
block-time published-time 11.00pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 1pm in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will beginat 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT), Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, has announced.  The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages it has held since its attacks into southern Israel on 7 October, under the terms of the agreement. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.Hamas is also set to release 23 Thai hostages it is holding in Gaza without any conditions, according to a report by the Al-Araby Al-Jadeed news site.  The release of Thai hostages after Iran-mediated talks  would not be connected to the deal reached by Israel and Hamas, the outlet reported on Thursday.The exchange of Palestinian and Israeli female and child hostages and prisoners had been due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out during 24 hours of frantic diplomacy. Sources close to the negotiations said  Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.Israel and Hamas have exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – will be freed on Friday afternoon,  Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson Ansari said. Israel has notified the families  of the hostages set to be released on Friday, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari said . The hostages are expected to be released at 4pm local time on Friday.  Joe Biden said he has his “fingers crossed”  that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl will be released on Friday.The diplomatic breakthrough promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.But Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, has said the military will resume fighting against Hamas “with intensity” for at least two more months. Addressing Israeli troops on Thursday, Gallant instructed them to “organise … resupply arms,  and get ready to continue” during the “short” respite in fighting.Israel’s army has arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital on Thursday more than a week after it surrounded and raided the medical facility. Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said, amid reports  that members of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy. The IDF confirmed Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. Just two doctors are left  at al-Shifa to treat the remaining estimated 200 patients, the hospital’s head of plastic surgery has said.Israeli forces bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians. Gaza’s health ministry said 27 people were killed in a strike on a school affiliated with the UN Palestinian refugee agency (UNRWA)  in Jabaliya refugee camp. The Palestinian Wafa news agency reported that dozens had been killed in Israeli bombing raids in Nuseirat and its camp in the central Gaza Strip, and in Jabaliya in the north. Among those reported killed in Nuseirat was a photojournalist, Mohammad Moin Ayyash, and his family.The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) said it has killed the commander of Hamas’s naval forces in Khan Younis in an airstrike in the Gaza Strip.Amar Abu Jalalah was killed  along with another member of the Hamas naval forces, the IDF said in a statement on Thursday.More than 13,000 Palestinians have been recorded killed in Gaza since the war began, according to Gaza’s health ministry.  The director of the health ministry, which is run by the Hamas-run government, said another 6,000 people have been reported missing and are feared buried under the rubble. Israel’s assault on Gaza followed the Hamas attack on 7 October, which killed at least 1,200 Israelis.David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu during a visit to Israel, and expressed hope that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”.  The Israeli prime minister told the new UK foreign secretary that the precondition for peace in the Middle East was the eradication of what Netanyahu called the “genocidal terrorist cult” Hamas. His remarks gave the impression that Netanyahu is not currently interested in anything but a military solution  to the future of Israel’s security.Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians,  including thousands of children”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.09pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.40pm GMT 
 People in Gaza are 'losing hope in humanity', says UNRWA chief in renewed calls for long-standing ceasefire  
The head of the UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) has said a temporary truce in Gaza will allow the agency to reach people in need in northern Gaza, as he renewed a call for a longstanding humanitarian ceasefire.
UNRWA commissioner general, Philippe Lazzarini , in statement  published today, said he had just returned from his second visit to the Gaza Strip since the war began. He wrote:
I bear witness to the unspeakable suffering of people. Since my first visit two weeks ago, the humanitarian situation has already become far worse.
He said the UN agency now hosts more than a million displaced Palestinians in its schools and premises across Gaza Strip, adding:
People are exhausted and are losing hope in humanity. They need respite, they deserve to sleep without being anxious about whether they will make it through the night. This is the bare minimum anyone should be able to have.
The four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas, set to begin on Friday morning, is “an opportunity to reach people in need including in the north and to start repairing civilian infrastructure”, he said.
enltrI have just returned from my second visit to the #GazaStrip   since the war began. I bear witness to the unspeakable suffering of people. As we all anticipate the beginning of the much-awaited pause, I reiterate my call for a long-standing humanitarian ceasefire. pic.twitter.com/VGZ1C866bT
 — Philippe Lazzarini (@UNLazzarini) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.23pm GMT 
 Humanitarian agencies preparing to go into Gaza continued to build up stocks of desperately needed aid ahead of a four-day humanitarian pause that is set to begin on Friday. 
The UN’s World Food Programme (WFP) chief, Cindy McCain, said the agency was “rapidly mobilising to scale up assistance inside Gaza” once safe access is granted.
WFP trucks are “waiting at the Rafah crossing, loaded with food slated for families in shelters and homes across Gaza, and wheat flour for bakeries to resume operations”, she said.
    Trucks carrying aid await an opportunity to enter Gaza via the Rafah crossing on 22 November 2023 in Arish, Egypt.  Photograph: Ali Moustafa/Getty Images   
Under the deal reached by Israel and Hamas, Israel will allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
On Thursday, Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, announced the ceasefire would start at 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT). Increased aid for Palestinians would start to enter “as soon as possible”, Ansari said.
Just over 73 truckloads of WFP food aid have made it into Gaza since limited aid deliveries through the Rafah crossing with Egypt resumed on 21 October, the agency said.
Speaking on Thursday, McCain expressed hope that more fuel will be let into Gaza “so that our trucks can carry in much-needed supplies and that once again bread will be available as a lifeline to hundreds of thousands of people every day”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.50pm GMT 
 Hamas to release 23 Thai hostages unconditionally after Iran-mediated talks - report  
Hamas is set to release 23 Thai hostages it is holding in Gaza without any conditions, according to a report by the Al-Araby Al-Jadeed news site.
The release of Thai hostages would not be connected to the deal reached by Israel and Hamas over the release of dozens of Israeli hostages held by militants as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel, the outlet said.
The announcement comes after Iran-mediated talks between the Palestinian militant group and the Thai government, it said.
enltrQatari @alaraby_ar  : Hamas is expected to release the 23 Thailand citizens that he took as hostages. The release *Is not connected to the hostage deal*. According to the report, this was an agreement reached by Iran.
— Amichai Stein (@AmichaiStein1) November 23, 2023
The Thai government has reportedly been in talks with Iran to secure the release of its 23 hostages held in Gaza since the 7 October Hamas terror attacks on Israel. It is the largest single group of foreigners held by the militant group, AP reported.
At least 32 Thai citizens were killed by Hamas on 7 October, according to Thai government figures. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.34pm GMT 
 Turkey’s health minister,  Fahrettin Koca , has discussed plans to evacuate wounded or sick Palestinian children and young people from Gaza tomorrow. 
A group of 50 Palestinians are expected to be brought over from Gaza on Friday as part of Turkey’s third round of evacuation, Reuters reported.
Koca said three sick children had been brought from Gaza to Turkey on Thursday. The children – a two-year-old boy, and two girls aged nine and 10 – will receive treatment in Turkey, he told reporters. He added:
We expect the third evacuation to be tomorrow[Friday] and it will be an evacuation that will largely consist of children and young people.
Turkey has so far brought 150 people, mostly cancer patients and their companions, from Gaza to continue their treatment. It has also evacuated more than 100 Turks, Turkish Cypriots, and their relatives this week.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.14pm GMT 
 Israel has notified the families of the hostages set to be released on Friday, the Israel Defens e Forces (IDF) spokesperson Daniel Hagari has said. 
The first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – are expected to be freed on Friday afternoon.
    A billboard bearing portraits of Israeli held hostages in Gaza since the October 7 attack by Hamas militants and calling for their release is pictured in Tel Aviv. Photograph: Ahmad Gharabli/AFP/Getty Images      A poster showing Ariel Bibas, 4, who is held hostage along with his family by Hamas in the Gaza Strip, is displayed ahead of an anticipated hostage release, in Tel Aviv, Israel. Photograph: Maya Alleruzzo/AP      People gather outside The Museum of Modern Art known as the ‘The Hostages and Missing Square’ after it was announced that 13 women and children would be released tomorrow and a temporary cease fire would begin at 7am on 23 November. Photograph: Alexi J Rosenfeld/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.48pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.07pm GMT 
 Gaza health ministry: 27 people killed in strike on UN school in Jabalia refugee camp  
The health ministry in Gaza said 27 Palestinians have been killed in a strike on a school affiliated with the UN Palestinian refugee agency (UNRWA) in Jabalia refugee camp in northern Gaza.
At least 27 people were killed and 93 wounded in the strike, AFP reported that a Palestinian doctor said. 
There was no immediate word from the Israeli military.
block-time published-time 8.45pm GMT 
 The mother of two Israeli hostages held in Gaza has said she has been informed that her children will not be  among the hostages released on Friday. 
Maayan Zin said her daughters, 15-year-old Dafna and 8-year-old Ela Elyakim, were kidnapped by Hamas militants from their father’s house  in kibbutz Nir Oz on 7 October.
“I’ve been informed that Dafna and Ela are not on the list of the 13 hostages to be released tomorrow,” Zin posted to social media on Thursday.
This is incredibly difficult for me; I long for their return.
enltrI've been informed that Dafna and Ela are not on the list of the 13 hostages to be released tomorrow. This is incredibly difficult for me; I long for their return. I'm relieved for the other families and hopeful for the release of all the hostages.
— Maayan Zin (@ZinMaayan1007) November 23, 2023
The office of Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has said it was in contact with the families of the hostages after receiving “a first list of names” of those due to be released. It did not specify who was on it.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.36pm GMT 
 IDF says it has killed Hamas naval commander  
The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) said it has killed the commander of Hamas’s naval forces in Khan Younis in an airstrike in the Gaza Strip.
 Amar Abu Jalalah was killed along with another member of the Hamas naval forces, the IDF said in a statement.
It said Jalalah was “a senior operative in Hamas’s naval forces and was involved in directing several terror attacks by sea that were thwarted.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.27pm GMT 
 Just two doctors are left to treat about 200 patients remaining at al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza, according to the hospital’s head of plastic surgery. 
Dr Ahmed El Mokhallalati told NBC News that the situation at the hospital, the largest medical complex in the Gaza Strip, as “very, very difficult”. He said:
Most of the staff have left yesterday, except for two doctors, me and my colleague and one nurse all in the hospital.
His comments came after the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) confirmed it had arrested  the director of al-Shifa hospital, Dr Mohammad abu Salmiya, on Thursday. He was arrested along with several other senior doctors as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy, according to reports.
In a statement, the IDF said al-Shifa “under [Abu Salmiya’s] direct management, served as a Hamas command and control centre” and that Hamas fighters had sought refuge in the hospital.
Posting to social media earlier today, Mokhallalati said his own health is “very bad” and that he and his colleagues are unable to continue providing treatment to the patients at the hospital, adding:
Every day, patients die due to Israeli occupation forces occupying the hospital.
enltrThe situation at Al Shifa hospital is very difficult. Currently, there are around 150 patients, and only two doctors to treat them. One nurse and 3 volunteers For 11 days, we lacked water, food, and medical supplies, except for two instances when the Israeli occupation army…
— Ahmed El Mokhallalati (@AMokhallalati) November 23, 2023
block-time published-time 8.01pm GMT 
 UN special rapporteurs working alongside the Human Rights Council have released a statement on Thursday expressing alarm at the “worldwide wave of attacks…against those who publicly express solidarity w/ the victims of the ongoing conflict between Israel and Palestine.” 
The statement said  : 
“Calls for an end to the violence and attacks in Gaza, or for a humanitarian ceasefire, or criticism of Israeli government’s policies and actions, have in too many contexts been misleadingly equated with support for terrorism or antisemitism. This stifles free expression, including artistic expression, and creates an atmosphere of fear to participate in public life…
In other contexts, we also see a rise in antisemitic speech as well as intolerance, for those who support or are perceived to support Israel, or who express mere sympathy for Israeli suffering in the aftermath of the 7 October attack… This leaves little space for moderate views…
It is especially in times of conflicts and war that we need to uphold the universality of human rights, ensure the application of the rule of law without discrimination, and carefully avoid double standards.”
block-time published-time 7.49pm GMT 
 The World Health Organization chief Tedros Ghebreyesus met with the Arab League Ambassadors Group in Geneva on Thursday to discuss the deteriorating health situation in Gaza. 
In a post on X, Ghebreyesus said that the group “agreed unfettered access is needed to ensure constant and enough health supplies.” 
enltrThis morning I met with Arab League Ambassadors Group in Geneva to discuss the health situation in #Gaza  and @WHO  's efforts to provide health assistance. We agreed unfettered access is needed to ensure constant and enough health supplies. pic.twitter.com/L8FaXhlsBr
 — Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (@DrTedros) November 23, 2023
In an update  on Tuesday, UNRWA, the UN agency for Palestinian refugees, said that as the number of displaced Palestinians across Gaza continue to increase, UNRWA shelter installations are acommodating “far more people than their intended capacity.” 
“The over-crowding is leading to significant spread of disease, including acute respiratory illness and diarrhea, raises environmental and health issues, and limits the agency’s ability to provide services,” UNRWA said.  
block-time published-time 7.32pm GMT 
 The World Food Programme has so far reached around 760,000 people inside Gaza with emergency food and vouchers, the UN body announced on Thursday. 
“We are doing everything we can to get food into Gaza and carry out life-saving initiatives that can help people cope,” Samer AbdelJaber, the director of WFP Palestine said. 
enltrIn photos: WFP has so far reached around 760,000 people inside #Gaza  with emergency food and vouchers. "We are doing everything we can to get food into Gaza and carry out life-saving initiatives that can help people cope," says @SamerWFP.  ?? https://t.co/J5y3SvP4hz pic.twitter.com/KdWZZwGwXZ
 — World Food Programme (@WFP) November 23, 2023
block-time published-time 7.14pm GMT 
 Achieving control over the northern half of the Gaza Strip will mark only the first stage in the Israeli campaign to destroy Hamas, the chief military spokesman said on Thursday, a day before a four-day pause in fighting was due to start, Reuters reports. 
“Control over northern Gaza is the first step of a long war,” Israeli military spokesperson Rear Admiral Daniel Hagari told a regular news briefing. 
“We are preparing for the next stages, we are looking forward in the coming days we will focus on planning and fulfilling the next stages of the war,” he added. 
block-time published-time 7.03pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s just past 9pm in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will beginat 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT), Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, has announced.  The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  after days of speculation and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages it has held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.The exchange of female and child hostages and prisoners was due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out during 24 hours of frantic diplomacy. Sources close to the negotiations said  Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.The two sides had exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – would be freed on Friday afternoon,  Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson Ansari said. Israel’s prime minister’s office confirmed it has received an “initial” list  of the hostages expected to be released at 4pm local time on Friday.  Joe Biden has said he has his “fingers crossed”  that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl taken hostage on 7 October will be released on Friday.The diplomatic breakthrough promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, has said the military will resume fighting against Hamas “with intensity” for at least two more months once the “short” temporary pause ends. He told troops to “organise, get ready, investigate, resupply arms, and get ready to continue” during the ceasefire. “This respite will be short,”  he said on Thursday.Israel’s army has arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital and bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians. Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said, amid reports that members of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy. The IDF confirmed Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning.The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) has said it is “deeply worried” about the director of its medical clinic in Khan Yunis,  who it said was arrested by Israeli forces and whose whereabouts is unknown. Awni Khattab was arrested  on Wednesday when a convoy transporting the wounded from al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza went through a checkpoint that separates north and south Gaza, the PRCS said in a statement.Gaza’s health ministry has resumed its detailed count of casualties from the Israel-Hamas war in the territory.  The director of the health ministry, which is run by the Hamas-run government, said it has documented more than 13,000 deaths , and that another 6,000 people have been reported missing and are feared buried under the rubble. Israel’s assault on Gaza followed the Hamas attack on 7 October which killed at least 1,200 Israelis.David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu and the Israeli president, Isaac Herzog, during a visit to Israel,expressing hope  that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”.Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians,  including thousands of children”.
block-time published-time 6.39pm GMT 
A spokesperson for the Qatari government has said a four-day ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will begin at 7am on Friday, after Hamas and Israel exchanged lists of people to be released from Israeli prisoners and hostages taken to Gaza. 
 Majed al-Ansari said he could not disclose how many Palestinians would be freed but that 13 people would be released by Hamas from Gaza. “All the women and children and those hostages from the same families will be put together within the same patch,” Ansari said.
Here’s a clip from his press briefing earlier:
block-time published-time 6.26pm GMT 
 Back in London, John Casson, David Cameron’s former chief foreign policy adviser in Downing Street, criticised Benjamin Netanyahu’s strategy, saying it was teaching hatred of Israel among Palestinians. 
He also called for a change to the ageing leadership of the Palestinian Authority.
In his main critique, he argued it was right to say “we stand with Israelis and say ‘never again’ to facing the terrorist horror of the last month – that is not the same as to say we endorse and enable what prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his partners are saying and doing because the two things are at odds.
The current approach is not making the Israelis safe and secure for the long term but creating a traumatised generation of Palestinians and teaching them that Israel is their enemy and it is undermining the prospects of a two-state solution and deliberately dismantling it.
block-time published-time 6.19pm GMT 
 David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu  and the Israeli president, Isaac Herzog, during a visit to Israel, expressing hope that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”. 
The Israeli prime minister told the new UK foreign secretary that the precondition for peace in the Middle East was the eradication of what Netanyahu called the “genocidal terrorist cult” Hamas. His remarks gave the impression that Netanyahu is not currently interested in anything but a military solution to the future of Israel’s security.
Cameron’s visit to Jerusalem and Ramallah, the headquarters of the Palestinian Authority, came on another dramatic day surrounding the release of hostages, and Palestinian political prisoners.
Netanyahu insisted Israel would continue with its plans to destroy Hamas, saying: 
We’ll continue with our war aims, namely to eradicate Hamas, because Hamas has already promised that they will do this again and again and again. They’re a genocidal terrorist cult. There’s no hope for peace between Israel and the Palestinians, between Israel and the Arab states, if we don’t eradicate this murderous movement that threatens the future of all of us.
It is understood Cameron discussed the impact of the conflict on civilians and the need to take all possible measures to minimise civilian casualties, and urged the Israelis to take action to end settler violence in the West Bank. The UK foreign secretary highlighted the need to use Kerem Shalom border crossing to scale up scanning and inspections to get more trucks in to Gaza.
block-time published-time 6.07pm GMT 
 Israel to continue 'intense' fighting for at least two months after 'short' truce, says defence minister  
Israel’s defence minister, Yoav Gallant, has said the military will resume fighting against Hamas “with intensity” for at least two more months once the “short” temporary pause ends.
Gallant, addressing troops of the Israeli navy special operations unit on Thursday, was quoted by the Times of Israel as saying:
What you will see in the coming days is first the release of hostages. This respite will be short.
He told troops to “organise, get ready, investigate, resupply arms, and get ready to continue” during the ceasefire, adding:
There will be a continuation, because we need to complete the victory and create the impetus for the next groups of hostages, who will only come back as a result of pressure.
“At least another two months of fighting is expected,” he added.
From the Times of Israel’s Emanuel Fabian:
enltrDefense Minister Yoav Gallant to troops of the Navy's Shayetet 13 commando unit: "This will be a short respite, after which the fighting will continue with intensity, and pressure will be made to bring back more hostages. At least two more months of fighting is expected." pic.twitter.com/scMUZWOdlh
 — Emanuel (Mannie) Fabian (@manniefabian) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.09pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.57pm GMT 
 Biden 'fingers crossed' that three-year-old American hostage will be released  
 Joe Biden has said he has his “fingers crossed” that a three-year-old Israeli-American girl taken hostage on 7 October will be released on Friday.
The US president, speaking to reporters in Nantucket, Massachusetts on Thursday, said he was “not prepared to given an update” on the hostages in Gaza “until it’s done”.
Asked about Abigail Mor Edan, the three-year-old, Biden responded: 
I’m keeping my fingers crossed.
From Axios’ Barak Ravid:
enltrFrom pool: Any update on Gaza hostages? Biden: “I’m not prepared to give an update until it’s done” Will three year old US girl be among those released initially? Biden: “I’m keeping my fingers crossed”
— Barak Ravid (@BarakRavid) November 23, 2023
block-time published-time 5.36pm GMT 
 The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) has said it is “deeply worried” about the director of its medical clinic in Khan Yunis, who it said was arrested by Israeli forces and whose whereabouts  is unknown. 
 Awni Khattab was arrested on Wednesday when a convoy transporting the wounded from al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza went through a checkpoint that separates north and south Gaza, the PRCS said in a statement. It added:
PRCS holds the Israeli authorities responsible for the safety of Khattab, and we demand his immediate release along with other medical teams that are under arrest.
enltr??PRCS is deeply worried about Awni Khattab, our colleague the head of Khan Younis Medical Center, #Gaza.  Israeli forces arrested him and now his whereabouts are unknown. ??The arrest took place yesterday while the convoy of the wounded from Al-Shifa Hospital was traveling… pic.twitter.com/amr9JoBewL
 — PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.47pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.19pm GMT 
In New York, the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day parade was interrupted when a group of pro-Palestinian protesters in jumpsuits covered in fake blood glued themselves to the street.
They carried a banner that said “Free Palestine” and “Genocide then. Genocide now” and were taken into custody, AP reported.
enltr?? Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade Blocked By Pro-Palestinian Protesters Pro-Palestinian protesters disrupted the Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade on 6th Avenue in New York City, according to multiple reports and videos from the scene. CREDIT: Jenn Ryan via Storyful pic.twitter.com/w0IWWLp044
 — Newsweek (@Newsweek) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.01pm GMT 
 Israel’s communications minister, Shlomo Karhi, has proposed halting government funding for the daily Haaretz newspaper, accusing the publication of “defeatist and false propaganda” against the state of Israel,  according to a Times of Israel report.
In a letter to cabinet secretary Yossi Fuchs, Karhi criticised Haaretz for its editorial stance on the war, and proposed that the state not enter into any new commercial agreements with the newspaper, halt all advertising in it, and block any outstanding payments from being made. He wrote:
Since the beginning of the war, my office has received numerous complaints that the Haaretz newspaper has taken a harmful line that undermines the goals of the war and weakens the military effort and societal resilience.
The letter comes after a report  in Haaretz published on Saturday that said an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) helicopter that engaged Hamas militants at the Nova music festival on 7 October also fired on festival participants.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.45pm GMT 
     Palestinians flee to the southern Gaza Strip, on the outskirts of Gaza City, during the ongoing Israeli bombardment. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      An Israeli self-propelled Howitzer artillery gun fires towards the Gaza Strip from a position close to the border in southern Israel. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images      Displaced Palestinians wait in line as volunteers distribute a hot meal in Khan Yunis in the southern Gaza Strip Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.43pm GMT 
 Mohammad abu Salmiya was regularly interviewed as Israeli forces attacked Gaza after 7 October, describing a desperately overcrowded facility housing 650 patients and sheltering another 5,000. He described allegations that al-Shifa sat above a Hamas command centre as untrue. 
Al-Shifa, the largest medical facility in Gaza, was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces over a week ago. Israel has repeatedly claimed that Hamas ran a command and control centre from tunnels running near and under the hospital, although so far the evidence presented has fallen short of that. 
The IDF took a group of journalists to visit the tunnels on Wednesday, and video reports  appeared showing lengthy tunnels reinforced with concrete blocks. A bathroom and an empty tiled room with electric sockets could be seen on the footage , although its purpose could not be discerned from the filmed material.
Daniel Hagari, the IDF’s spokesperson, said on Wednesday evening the footage showed that “Hamas built tunnels underneath hospitals, used them to command their operations”, and accused the group of “using the protected status of the hospitals as a shield”.
    Israeli soldiers show the media an underground tunnel found below al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP   
Patients and civilians have since been gradually evacuated from al-Shifa and the hospital’s boss was among the last to leave, on a day in which intense fighting continued unabated across Gaza as the planned truce was delayed by at least a day.
A second hospital in northern Gaza, the Indonesia hospital, has now been evacuated at the insistence of Israel’s military, according to the Indonesian charity Medical Emergency Rescue Committee (Mer-C), which helped fund and build it. Gaza’s health ministry said the evacuation meant that 65 bodies at the facility remained unburied.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.38pm GMT 
 Israel’s army has arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital and bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians, as an agreed four-day truce was delayed until Friday.  
 Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said,  amid reports that members of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy.
“Dr Mohammad abu Salmiya was arrested along with several other senior doctors,” Khalid abu Samra told the AFP news agency, while Gaza’s ministry of health demanded the WHO explain what had happened.
Several hours later, the IDF confirmed  Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. It said that al-Shifa “under his direct management, served as a Hamas  command and control centre” and that Hamas fighters had sought refuge in the hospital.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.15pm GMT 
 The UK’s foreign secretary, David Cameron, has met Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, during a visit to Israel today. 
Cameron, who earlier visited kibbutz Be’eri,  the scene of some of the worst violence during the Hamas assault inside Israel on 7 October, told the Israeli leader in Jerusalem:
I wanted to come here in person... to see just the true nature of the horrific attacks that you faced, I think that’s very important to do that and see that, we stand with the people of Israel.
     Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, with Britain’s foreign secretary, David Cameron, during a meeting in the Knesset in Jerusalem. Photograph: GPO/KOBI GIDEON HANDOUT/EPA      Cameron met Netanyahu in Jerusalem. Photograph: GPO/KOBI GIDEON HANDOUT/EPA   
He added that he believed the announcement of a truce between Israel and Hamas would be an opportunity to get the hostages out and to get aid into Gaza, adding:
I hope everyone who is responsible and behind this agreement can make it happen.
Netanyahu vowed to “continue with our war aims, namely to eradicate Hamas”, adding:
There is no hope for peace between Israel and the Palestinians and between Israel and the Arab countries if we do not eradicate this murderous movement, which threatens the future of all of us.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.59pm GMT 
Ziad, a 35-year-old Palestinian in Gaza, on helping a child suffering from toothache, marvelling at a family’s ability to laugh and sing, and how a simple scarf can allow you to dream of better times for his diary for the Guardian:
 8am A woman I know once wondered about what life would be like if tears were coloured. If there was a specific colour for tears of joy, sadness, anger, despair and helplessness.
We have reached a stage where it is not a surprise to see someone crying in the street. They might have lost someone, they might have lost their home or maybe they have no place to go. The list could go on and on.
I leave early every day to start searching for anything useful. The shops open early to welcome all the lost souls. I call us the lost souls because we don’t know who we are any more. We had jobs, dreams and somewhat normal routines. Then suddenly we had to leave, and found ourselves in places we have never lived in before. Now we are facing the unknown. Our minds and souls are lost.
    Palestinians in a Khan Yunis supermarket with barely any food left. ‘We have reached a stage where getting bread easily is a victory.’ Photograph: AFP/Getty Images   
I see a man bringing a big bag with Saj bread. He starts calling out to let people know that he has something to sell. I run and reach him first. I ask him for some bread and pay him. Just like that. Then many people start running towards him. I take the bread – no, I hug the Saj bread – and pass through the gathering crowd. I have a big smile over my face. For almost half an hour I keep walking, not focusing where I am going. I’m just feeling happy.
A tear falls down my face, it does not need a colour. It is not a tear of sadness. We have reached a stage where getting bread easily is a victory, and it was a tear of gratefulness. I was grateful.
Read Ziad’s full diary entry here.
 Related:  Gaza diary part 26: ‘There is still space for acts of kindness, moments of joy’
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.39am GMT
block-time published-time 3.50pm GMT 
 Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”. 
Sánchez’s blunt pleas came during a visit to the Middle East with the Belgian prime minister, Alexander  De Croo, during which he called for a peace conference and reiterated that the creation of a Palestinian state remained the best way to bring peace and security to the region.
The response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians, including thousands of children”, Sánchez said.
Speaking as he met Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday afternoon, Sánchez said Spain had repeatedly condemned Hamas’s “shocking acts of terrorism” and acknowledged Israel’s right to defend itself. But he added:
Let me also be clear: Israel must abide by international law, including international humanitarian law, in its response … The whole world is shocked at the images that we see coming from Gaza every day. The number of Palestinians killed is truly unbearable. I believe that all civilians must be protected at all costs.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.07pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.41pm GMT 
 Hamas confirms truce to begin at 7am on Friday  
The armed wing of Hamas, the Izz ad-Din al Qassam brigades or al-Qassam brigades, has confirmed that a four-day pause in fighting will begin at 7am local time in Gaza (0500 GMT).
During the truce, all military actions by al-Qassam Brigades and Israeli forces will cease, according to a statement on Thursday.
It added that Israeli military would stop flights over the southern Gaza Strip and would also cease flying for six hours daily, from 10am to 4pm over Gaza City and the northern areas.
The statement also sayss Israeli “prisoners, women and children under the age of 19, will be released”. Three Palestinian prisoners, including women and children, would be released for every Israeli, it added.
In addition, 200 trucks containing medical supplies would be brought into Gaza on a daily basis, along with four trucks containing fuel and cooking gas.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.24pm GMT 
 Qatar says ceasefire to begin Friday 7am, 13 hostages to be released later that day  
A four-day ceasefire in Gaza  between Israel and Hamas will begin on Friday morning, a day later than originally announced, after negotiators worked out final details of the deal, which will lead to the release of dozens of hostages held by militants as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.
 Majed al-Ansari, a spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, which played a key role in mediating with Hamas, announced the cease-fire will start at 7 a.m. local time Friday (5 a.m. GMT.)
He said the two sides had exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – including 13 women and children – would be freed Friday afternoon. Increased aid for Palestinians will start to enter “as soon as possible,” al-Ansari said.
The exchange of female and minor hostages and prisoners was due to take place on Thursday but postponed as last minute logistical issues were worked out over 24 hours of frantic diplomacy.
The truce, which initially would last for four days, was announced early on Wednesday  after days of speculation and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they have held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
There will be a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza, with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. According to a Hamas statement, Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the truce.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.55pm GMT 
 While this press conference in Doha has been going on, Israel’s prime minister’s office has confirmed it has received an “initial” list of the hostages expected to be released at 4pm local time on Friday. 
It said: “The relevant officials are checking the details of the list and are currently in contact with all families.”
The Times of Israel is reporting that there has also been confirmation from Hamas that the ceasefire will last four days, and that 50 hostages will be released in total.
The Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson said 13 Israeli hostages are expected to be released tomorrow and this will be followed by a release of Palestinian detainees from Israel’s jail.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.38pm GMT 
 The Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson has described the Israel-Hamas deal as “a glimmer of light at the end of the tunnel”. 
He has said that the criteria to prioritise hostages was humanitarian with a focus on women and children. He said he hoped there would be momentum generated by the deal to help everybody get out and “lessen the hardship of the people in Gaza through the humanitarian pause that is taking place”.
The press conference is taking place in Doha, where a 7am ceasefire in Gaza and a 4pm Israeli hostage release for Friday has been announced.
One question that has just come from a journalist in the room has been to have reassurance that all the hostages on the list for initial release are alive. The spokesperson said they are alive, but he also said he does not have verifiable information of the total number of hostages and their status.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.32pm GMT 
The Qatar foreign ministry briefing is being given by Majed al-Ansari. He has said a ceasefire will start in Gaza tomorrow at 7am local time Friday morning, and that the first hostages will be released at 4pm local time Friday afternoon. Thirteen Israelis are expected to be returned. This will be followed by the release of some Palestinian detainees from Israel’s jails. He has said for security reasons he cannot disclose the exact mechanics.
The Q&A portion of this press conference is being given in Arabic or English, depending on which media organisation has asked the question.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.29pm GMT 
 Qatar’s foreign ministry spokesperson said   Gaza is a war zone, and the delay in the plan was to ensure safety all round. 
He said the lists and timings of release have only been agreed for the first day and that subsequent days will be announced as it goes along.
He says it is important that lines of communication stay open. He says the truce is a cessation of all hostilities, and could be broken by any resumption of hostilities, however it is defined.
He said he thinks they have reached a point now where they are ready to go on the ground and that there should be no further delays.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.24pm GMT 
The Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson in Doha has said they are unable to discuss for security reasons where hostages will be released to, but has said the Red Cross will be involved.
They have also said it is anticipated that Israel will make a Palestinian prisoner release tomorrow following the release of hostages. It is expected that 13 Israeli hostages will be released at 4pm local time tomorrow. He did not specify how many Palestinians detained by Israel would be released in the first instance.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.17pm GMT 
 Qatar announces ceasefire will begin 7am Friday, first hostage release due at 4pm Friday  
 At a press conference in Doha, a Qatari foreign ministry spokesperson has said   the ceasefire will begin Friday at 7am (5am GMT) and that the first hostage release, of 13 hostages, will be at 4pm Friday (2pm GMT). 
The spokesperson said they expect aid to start moving into Gaza through the Rafah crossing as soon as the ceasefire starts.
Hamas is believed to have seized at least 240 Israeli hostages during its 7 October attack inside Israel. The deal, drawn up between Israel and Hamas, brokered by Qatar, Egypt and the US, envisages that 50 Israeli hostages will be returned in exchange for a four-day pause in hostilities, and the release of 150 Palestinians held in Israeli detention.
It had been hoped that the first release could have taken place on Thursday, but last-minute hitches delayed the expected implementation of the ceasefire.
The Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October killed at least 1,200 people. The subsequent Israeli assault on the Gaza Strip has, according to the health ministry there, killed at least 13,000 Palestinians, many of them children. It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify the casualty figures issued during the conflict.
More details soon …
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.47pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
Here are the latest headlines …
A long-awaited hostage and ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas won’t take effect before Friday, US and Israeli officials have said, dashing the hopes of families who thought captives may be freed earlier and prolonging the suffering of Palestinians under bombardment in Gaza.  It was not immediately clear what caused the delay. The deal had been expected to come into force from Thursday.Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza  after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.A Palestinian official told AFP on Thursday a delay in implementation of a truce in the Gaza Strip between Israeli forces and Hamas was due to “last minute” details over which hostages would be released and how.  The Wall Street Journal, citing senior Egyptian officials, reported that a failure to exchange lists for the swap and disagreements about access for the Red Cross have caused the delay.The Israeli military confirmed today that the director of al-Shifa hospital in the Gaza Strip had been held for questioning. Muhammad Abu Salmiya was reportedly detained with other medical staff while heading to the south of the Gaza Strip. In a statement the IDF said: “In the hospital, under his management, there was extensive Hamas terrorist activity. Findings of his involvement in terrorist activity will determine whether he will be subject to further questioning.” The Palestinian health minister, Mai Al-Kayl, said the arrests showed that Israel was flouting international humanitarian law.The Israeli military (IDF) says it struck more than 300 “Hamas terror targets” in total over the past day.  In a Telegram post the IDF said it had struck “military command centres, underground terror tunnels, weapon storage facilities, weapon manufacturing sites and anti-tank missile posts”.Gaza’s health ministry, which is run by the Hamas-led government, has resumed its detailed count of casualties from the Israel-Hamas war  in the territory.  The director of the health ministry, Medhat Abbas, confirmed the resumption, said it has documented more than 13,000 deaths, and that another 6,000 people have been reported missing and are feared buried under the rubble. Israel’s assault on Gaza followed the Hamas attack on 7 October which killed at least 1,200 Israelis. It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify casualty figures during the conflict.A spokesperson for the International Committee of the Red Cross has told Al Jazeera that its staff were fired upon while trying to deliver humanitarian support in northern Gaza.Iran ’s foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, has met Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah in Beirut.Israel and Hezbollah have again exchanged fire over the UN-drawn blue line that divides Israel and Lebanon. Israel claims to have intercepted multiple launches.The US says it has downed drones in the Red Sea that had been launched from Yemen.The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, is in Israel, where he has visited kibbutz Be’eri, one of the sites attacked by Hamas on 7 October in an assault that one of the survivors described as a “pogrom”. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.54pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.32pm GMT 
 The Israeli military has provided no details on the circumstances of the detention of the al-Shifa hospital director, Muhammad Abu Salmiya, but Reuters reports the Palestinian health ministry said he and a number of doctors were arrested at dawn at a checkpoint on the road linking northern Gaza to the south. 
The Palestinian health minister, Mai Al-Kayla, said the arrests showed that Israel was flouting international humanitarian law. Al-Kayla is the minister for the Palestinian Authority in the occupied West Bank, which has no control over the health system in Gaza, which has been governed by Hamas since 2007.
Hamas has condemned the arrest, saying: “We consider it a despicable act that only comes from an entity that lacks all sense of humanity and morals.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.42pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.21pm GMT 
Water is one of the most precious resources in Israel and the Palestinian territories. But there is a stark imbalance in how this resource is distributed. In the occupied West Bank, Israeli-owned farms are flourishing, while Palestinians often do not have enough water to drink. And in Gaza, Palestinians are facing deadly levels of water shortage. Josh Toussaint-Strauss examines how Israel took control of the region’s water supply and created a deadly scarcity crisis for Palestinians.
block-time published-time 1.20pm GMT 
There has been considerable speculation about why the release of hostages and the implementation of a temporary truce has been delayed. The Wall Street Journal has an account, which it sources to senior Egyptian officials. Jared Malsin and Summer Said write  :
Senior Egyptian officials said Hamas failed to formally sign off on the mechanism for the hostages’ release, and didn’t provide Israel with a specific list of around a dozen or more to be freed first. 
Israel for its part delayed the handover of a list of the first group of Palestinian prisoners it plans to free, according to officials familiar with the talks. 
Among the technical issues gumming up the process is access by the International Committee of the Red Cross to the released hostages, and negotiations over the exit through which they will leave Gaza, according to officials familiar with the situation.
Israel had wanted the hostages to be handed over to the Red Cross before their transfer to Israel, while Hamas is now asking for them to be given directly to Egypt, the officials said. Israel has also asked that the Red Cross be given access to those hostages who remain in Gaza after the first exchange, something Hamas hasn’t agreed to.
block-time published-time 1.12pm GMT 
Here is the full IDF statement on the detention of Muhammad Abu Salmiya, the director of al-Shifa hospital:
The director of the al-Shifa hospital in the Gaza Strip was apprehended and transferred for ISA questioning following evidence showing that the al-Shifa hospital, under his direct management, served as a Hamas command and control centre. The Hamas terror tunnel network situated under the hospital also exploited electricity and resources taken from the hospital. In addition, Hamas stored numerous weapons inside the hospital and on the hospital grounds.
Furthermore, after the Hamas massacre on 7 October, Hamas terrorists sought refuge within the hospital, some of them taking hostages from Israel with them. A pathological report also confirmed the murder of CPL Noa Marciano on the hospital premises.
In the hospital, under his management, there was extensive Hamas terrorist activity. Findings of his involvement in terrorist activity will determine whether he will be subject to further ISA questioning.
The IDF also rereleased the statement from the Israeli military spokesperson, Daniel Hagari, yesterday, in which he said: “Now, the irrefutable truth of Hamas’s exploitation of hospitals in Gaza is on full display to the world. We have an important question to ask the international community: what will you do to stop Gaza’s hospitals from being turned into terror bases in the future? Will you condemn Hamas? Or will you continue to be silent? Will you remain silent? I want to make it clear that Israel is at war with Hamas. We are not at war with the people of Gaza.”
Hamas and medical staff within Gaza’s hospitals have repeatedly denied the Israeli accusation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.02pm GMT 
 Israeli military says it has detained director of al-Shifa hospital for questioning  
 The Israeli military confirmed  today that the director of al-Shifa hospital in the Gaza Strip had been held for questioning. Muhammad Abu Salmiya was reportedly detained while heading to the south of the Gaz a Strip. 
Reuters reports that Israel said it was questioning him over evidence that the facility had been used as a command and control centre for the Islamist movement Hamas.
“In the hospital, under his management, there was extensive Hamas terrorist activity,” the military said in a statement.
Abu Salmiya had frequently spoken to international media over the course of the conflict about conditions in and around the hospital during the Israeli bombardment and siege of the Gaza Strip.
Israel has repeatedly accused Hamas of using hospitals as cover for its activities, which Hamas and medical staff have repeatedly denied.
Earlier this week Israel released footage, which showing reinforced tunnels allegedly used by Hamas, with what the IDF said showed a meeting room, kitchen and bathroom.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.26pm GMT 
 A spokesperson for the International Committee of the Red Cross has told Al Jazeera that its staff were fired upon while trying to deliver humanitarian support in northern Gaza. 
It said: “Healthcare workers have special protection under international law and we are pressing for immediate protection for all civilians,” adding that hospitals in Gaza had been “turned into cemeteries and war fields”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.15pm GMT 
 Dani Dayan , chair  of Jerusalem’s Yad Vashem World Holocaust  memorial centre, has told AFP that comparisons between the Hamas attack on 7 October and the Holocaust were “simplistic”, even if “the genocidal intentions, sadism and barbarism of Hamas” had similarities with Nazi atrocities. 
He told the news agency: “The crimes that took place on 7 October are on the same level as Nazi crimes, but they are not the Shoah. I do not accept the simplistic comparison with the Holocaust even if there are similarities in the genocidal intentions, sadism and barbarism of Hamas.
“For any Jew who has heard the stories of families putting their hands over a baby’s mouth to stop it from crying, the association of ideas is obvious. We have all thought about it.”
Dayan said, however, that aside from the scale of the events, unlike many of the Jews targeted during the second world war, Israelis are far from defenceless victims, and the state has hit back hard.
“We cannot compare it with the period of the Holocaust because there is an army here, which is fighting and making Hamas pay the price,” he said.
Dayan has previously criticised Israel’s ambassador to the UN, Gilad Erdan, who pinned a yellow star to his chest insisting he would wear it until the UN security council condemned the Hamas attack. “This act disgraces the victims of the Holocaust,” Dayan said at the time.
He has also criticised the UN secretary general, António Guterres, who had said the Hamas attacks “did not happen in a vacuum”.
“I asked him what context could explain the beheading of children, rapes or shootings of young people at a music festival,” Dayan said.
The memorial centre itself counts some of its own staff among the victims of 7 October. Polish-born Israeli historian Alex Dancyg, 75, who worked at Yad Vashem, was last seen at the Nir Oz kibbutz and is feared to be among the hostages , as is one of the guides, Liat Atzili.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.07pm GMT 
The Israeli ambassador to the UK, Tzipi Hotovely, has been in Kibbutz Be’eri today as part of the delegation visiting with the British foreign secretary, David Cameron. She has posted a video from the location showing one of the burnt-out houses at the kibbutz after Hamas attacked it  on 7 October.
enltrSince the horrors of October 7th, Israel has changed. See for yourself just a snapshot of the level of destruction that the genocidal terrorists of Hamas inflicted on the peace-loving community of Kibbutz Be'eri. pic.twitter.com/1KzumhZYLU
 — Tzipi Hotovely (@TzipiHotovely) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.10pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.53am GMT 
     Ambulances are seen on a road near an Israeli forces tank during an Israeli army ground operation in the Gaza Strip. Photograph: Víctor R Caivano/AP      A Palestinian medic and civilians carry an injured man after an Israeli strike on Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip, amid continuing battles between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty      Israeli troops ride a vehicle past damaged buildings during a military operation in the northern Gaza Strip amid continuing battles between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas. Photograph: Ahikam Seri/AFP/Getty      A Palestinian medic walks among civilians on the rubble of a building after an Israeli strike on Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip, amid continuing battles between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57am GMT
block-time published-time 11.40am GMT 
 Here is a little more on the apparent Israeli detention of al-Shifa hospital’s director, Muhammad Abu Salmiya. 
Al Jazeera reports a spokesperson for the health ministry in Gaza said Abu Salmiya was en route from the northern Gaza Strip to the south with other medics when he was arrested by Israeli forces. Al Jazeera also reports that the Israeli broadcaster Kan said he was questioned by the intelligence service Shin Bet after his arrest.
Hamas has, Al Jazeera reports, issued a statement calling for international organisations to work to have Abu Salmiya and other medical staffed release. It said:
We consider it a despicable act that only comes from an entity that lacks all sense of humanity and morals, in addition to being a crime and a flagrant violation of international conventions that guarantee no attacks against medical personnel at all times.
Israel began its latest campaign against Gaza after the Hamas attack inside Israel on 7 October, which killed at least 1,200 people, mainly civilians, and during which Hamas abducted an estimated 240 hostages.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.23am GMT 
The Scream franchise star Melissa Barrera has publicly responded to being fired from Scream VII for sharing posts that the film’s production company says were interpreted as antisemitic. The actor said she condemned antisemitism and Islamophobia but would “continue to speak out” on the Israel-Hamas conflict.
Barrera, who starred in the fifth and sixth Scream films and was to star in the forthcoming seventh instalment, has been outspoken in support of Palestine on social media, where she has described Israel as committing “genocide” and “brutally killing innocent Palestinians, mothers and children, under the pretence of destroying Hamas”.
On Tuesday, Barrera was fired from Scream VII by the production company Spyglass Media, who confirmed to Variety  the decision was due to some of her social media posts, which were interpreted as antisemitic.
“We have zero tolerance for antisemitism or the incitement of hate in any form, including false references to genocide, ethnic cleansing, Holocaust distortion or anything that flagrantly crosses the line into hate speech,” a Spyglass spokesperson told Variety. The Guardian has not confirmed which posts Spyglass was referring to.
 Read more here: Melissa Barrera, fired from Scream VII over Israel-Hamas posts, responds: ‘Silence is not an option’
 Related:  ‘Silence is not an option’: Melissa Barrera responds to being fired from Scream VII over Israel-Hamas posts
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.35am GMT
block-time published-time 11.15am GMT 
 Iran’s foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, has met   Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of Hezbollah. 
AFP reports that in a statement, Hezbollah said the two men “reviewed the latest developments in Palestine, Lebanon and the region, and … the efforts made to end the Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip”.
Amir-Abdollahian, who warned on Wednesday that the war could spiral out of control, left Beirut for Doha after their meeting, Iran’s Nour news agency reported.
    A handout photo made available by the Hezbollah media relations office shows the Hezbollah leader, Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah (second right), meeting the Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir Abdollahian (second left), in Beirut. Photograph: Hezbollah Media Relations Office Handout/EPA   
Hezbollah said on Thursday morning it fired 48 Katyusha rockets at a military base at Ein Zeitim, near the town of Safed in northern Israel. It said it also carried out at least 10 other attacks on Israeli positions near the frontier. The IDF earlier said it had returned fire over the UN-drawn blue line that separates the two countries.
The violence between Israel and Hezbollah has claimed at least 108 lives in Lebanon, most of them Hezbollah fighters, but also at least 14 civilians, including three journalists, according to an AFP count.
Six Israeli soldiers and three civilians have been killed on the Israeli side, according to the authorities.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.18am GMT
block-time published-time 11.09am GMT 
 The English Football Association is to stop lighting the arch at Wembley   in support of humanitarian causes after the controversy  that followed its decision not to commemorate the Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October. 
Wembley will be illuminated only for sporting and entertainment purposes, after the FA board reflected on its policy. Speaking last month, its chief executive, Mark Bullingham, said he “recognised the hurt”  to the Jewish community caused by the decision to leave the arch unlit during England men’s friendly against Australia in the week after the Hamas attack.
 Read more here: FA to stop lighting Wembley arch for humanitarian causes
 Related:  FA to stop lighting Wembley arch for humanitarian causes
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.20am GMT
block-time published-time 10.53am GMT 
On its Telegram channel the Israeli military has claimed it has intercepted a number of launches from inside Lebanon which were aimed at Israel.
It wrote:
Following the initial reports regarding sirens sounding in northern Israel, approximately 35 launches were identified crossing from Lebanon toward Israeli territory. The IDF Aerial Defense Array intercepted a number of the launches. In addition, since this morning, terrorists launched a number of anti-tank missiles and mortars at various locations along the border with Lebanon.
There have been frequent exchanges of fires between the IDF and anti-Israeli forces over the UN-drawn blue line that separates Lebanon and Israel.
Earlier it was reported that Hezbollah had claimed to fire 48 rockets into Israeli territory in Upper Galilee. There are no reports of any casualties on the Israeli side.
block-time published-time 10.38am GMT 
 A doctor at Gaza’s  al-Shifa hospital has told AFP   the facility’s director and several other medical personnel were arrested by Israeli forces on Thursday.  [ See 7.55am GMT  ]
Director Mohammad Abu Salmiya has been frequently quoted by international media about the conditions inside al-Shifa.
“Doctor Mohammad Abu Salmiya was arrested along with several other senior doctors,” said Khalid Abu Samra, a department chief at the hospital.
An official in the Hamas-run health ministry told AFP that one other doctor and two nurses had been detained, as well as the hospital director.
In a statement, Hamas said it “strongly denounces” the arrest of Salmiya and his colleagues, calling on the International Committee of the Red Cross and other international organisations to work towards their “immediate release”.
The Israeli army has alleged that Hamas fighters use a tunnel complex beneath the facility in Gaza City to stage attacks. Hamas and hospital officials have repeatedly denied the claims.
Al-Shifa hospital has been the scene of an extended Israeli special forces operation as part of its war against Hamas in the Gaza Strip, where the Hamas-run health ministry claims more than 13,000 people have been killed, including thousands of children. Approximately 6,000 Palestinians are said to be missing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.51am GMT
block-time published-time 10.15am GMT 
Patrick Wintour is the Guardian’s diplomatic editor:
 Benjamin Netanyahu’s strategy is teaching a traumatised generation of Palestinians to hate Israel , deliberately undermining the chances of a two-state solution, John Casson, the former foreign policy private secretary to David Cameron at  No 10 said on Tuesday. 
Casson was speaking as his former boss, now the foreign secretary, arrived in Israel for talks with Netanyahu.
Prior to Cameron’s appointment, Casson was highly critical of British policy saying it had lost leverage by simply following Israeli policy. In a further BBC interview on Tuesday he expressed the hope that Cameron’s appointment will see the UK start to chart some positions ahead of Israel and the Palestinians into which the two sides could then enter.
He also called for a new generation of Palestinian leaders in the West Bank, saying the absence of elections means they have lost legitimacy.
There is no suggestion that Casson, a former British ambassador to Egypt until 2018, is speaking with the foreign secretary’s approval. But knowing Cameron well, he said he thought the foreign secretary was clear-eyed about Netanyahu, but also put great store by personal relationships.
Casson said the UK should scale up the amount of humanitarian aid being sent to the Palestinians, arguing the money offered so far was a fraction of what was offered by the UK three or four years ago.
He also said Cameron needed to impress on the Israelis there was not a solely military solution to defeating Hamas, arguing a military response “has to create space for a strategic response and not undercut it”.
In his key critique, he argued: “When we say we stand with Israelis and say never again to face the terrorist horror of the last month – that is not the same as to say we endorse and enable what prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his partners are saying and doing because the two things are at odds.
“The current approach is not making the Israelis safe and secure for the long term but creating a traumatised generation of Palestinians and teaching them that Israel is their enemy, and it is undermining the prospects of a two-state solution, and deliberately dismantling it.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.14am GMT
block-time published-time 10.08am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    An Israeli soldier sits in a Merkava tank near the Israel-Gaza border. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters      An injured Palestinian man sits on a wheelchair at the Ras Al-Naqoura school in Khan Younis, in the southern Gaza Strip, after being transferred from the Indonesian hospital in the north. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty      Palestinians walking through rubble and debris in Deir al-Balah. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty      A woman holding a child flees following an Israeli strike in Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip, an area where Israel has been ordering Gazan residents to flee to. Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.10am GMT
block-time published-time 9.57am GMT 
The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, has made some comments to the media while visiting kibbutz Be’eri, the scene of some of the worst violence during the Hamas assault inside Israel on 7 October.
The former prime minister said:
I wanted to come here to see it for myself; I have heard and seen things I will never forget.
Today is also a day where we hope to see progress on the humanitarian pause. This is a crucial opportunity to get hostages out and aid into Gaza, to help Palestinian civilians who are facing a growing humanitarian crisis.
     The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, and the Israeli foreign minister, Eli Cohen, visit kibbutz Be’eri. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters   
Cameron was accompanied by the Israeli foreign minister, Eli Cohen, who said: “World leaders need to see the horrors of Hamas with their own eyes.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.11am GMT
block-time published-time 9.54am GMT 
Earlier the IDF posted to its Telegram channel that “a number of launches were detected from Lebanese territory towards Israeli territory”.
Haaretz is now reporting that Hezbollah has claimed responsibility for firing 48 rockets towards the Upper Galilee region in Israel’s north.
There are, to date, no reports of any casualties.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.12am GMT
block-time published-time 9.28am GMT 
 A Palestinian official told AFP on Thursday   a delay in implementation of a truce in the Gaza Strip between Israeli forces and Hamas was due to “last minute” details over which hostages would be released and how. 
The truce, widely expected to go into force on Thursday but delayed during the night, had been put back over “the names of the Israeli hostages and the modalities of their release”, said the official, who has knowledge of the negotiation process but asked to remain anonymous.
Lists of those to be freed had been exchanged by both sides, he added. Questions were also being raised over Red Cross access to the hostages before they would be released into Egypt, he said, and whether the Red Cross would have access to those who remained.
A senior Hamas official reached by phone told AFP there were “obstacles linked to the situation on the ground”, hoping that there would not be “a mistake that has a negative impact on the truce or prevent it happening”.
But “mediators are shuttling between the two sides and the atmosphere is still constructive”, he added.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.35am GMT
block-time published-time 9.06am GMT 
 Gaza health ministry: more than 13,000 dead and 6,000 people missing  
 Gaza’s health ministry, which is run by the Hamas-led government, has told Associated Press   it has resumed its detailed count of casualties from the Israel-Hamas war in the territory. 
The director of the health ministry, Medhat Abbas, confirmed the resumption, saying it has documented more than 13,000 deaths.
The latest count is based on updated figures from hospitals in the south and 11 November figures from the northern hospitals. The real toll, it said, is likely higher.
The health ministry says another 6,000 people have been reported missing, and are feared buried under the rubble.
The health ministry had stopped updating its figures on 11 November after the breakdown of access and communication in northern Gaza.
 Related:  Can we trust casualty figures from the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.34am GMT
block-time published-time 9.00am GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
It is 11am in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the latest headlines …
A long-awaited hostage and ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas won’t take effect before Friday, US and Israeli officials have said, dashing the hopes of families who thought captives may be freed earlier and prolonging the suffering of Palestinians under bombardment in Gaza.  It was not immediately clear what caused the delay. The deal had been expected to come into force from Thursday.Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza  after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.The Israeli military (IDF) says it struck more than 300 “Hamas terror targets” in total over the past day.  In a Telegram post the IDF said it had struck “military command centres, underground terror tunnels, weapon storage facilities, weapon manufacturing sites and anti-tank missile posts”.The chief of the general staff of Israel’s armed forces has told soldiers “we are not ending the war”. In comments to brigade commanders inside Gaza released to the media, Herzi Halevi said: “We are not ending the war. We will continue until we are victorious, going forward and continuing in other Hamas areas. I’m very proud of you, you are doing an outstanding job.”The Israeli offensive in Gaza has so far killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials. More are thought to be under rubble.  Israel launched the assault after the Hamas attacks on 7 October inside Israel, which killed at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and during which an estimated 240 people were taken hostage. It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify the casualty figures being issued during the conflict.Sarbini Abdul Murad, the head of the Indonesian charity Medical Emergency Rescue Committee, has said: “The Indonesia hospital in Gaza is now empty. The doctors and the wounded were moved to the European hospital. Our volunteers are sheltering at a school with thousands of others.”In another development, unconfirmed reports say the director of the al-Shifa hospital has been detained by Israeli forces.The US says it has downed drones in the Red Sea that had been launched from Yemen.Israel’s military spokesperson, Danial Hagari, has said the IDF has again attacked targets inside Lebanon. There had been indications yesterday that while it was not a direct part of the Israel-Hamas deal, Hezbollah would respect a truce period on the northern boundary between Israel and Lebanon. The IDF reported “a number of launches” from Lebanon into Israel.The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, is in Israel, where he has visited kibbutz Be’eri, one of the sites attacked by Hamas on 7 October in an assault that one of the survivors described as a “pogrom”. Germany ’s interior ministry said 15 properties of members and supporters of Hamas and another Palestinian organisation – Samidoun  had been raided in four regions. The groups are banned in the country. There are an estimated 450 Hamas members in Germany, according to official figures.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.46am GMT 
 Israeli government spokesperson Eylon Levy has been appearing on television in the UK, where he told viewers that Hamas could choose to release any of the hostages it holds at any time, and that it did not have to be contingent on a deal. 
He said on Sky News that the delay in releasing hostages was “heartbreaking”, saying:
You know, Hamas could release the hostages now. It could have released them yesterday. It could have released them on 7 October. And every moment that it chooses not to release those vulnerable little children is a moment that it continues to psychologically terrorise these children’s families. 
They’ve been holding them in the dark and they’ve been keeping their families in the dark. Their families know nothing about their condition. Physically, mentally, emotionally. You know, maybe even worse, these children don’t know what has happened to their families. 
This hostage crisis is intensely personal for everyone in Israel. We’re a small country. Everyone knows someone who has had someone stolen from them. And we’re hoping to begin bringing back our stolen children, bring back those hostages, and we’re committed to the pledge that we will bring all of them back, and there will be no one left behind.
block-time published-time 8.42am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    Smoke rises following an Israeli airstrike in central Gaza, as seen from southern Israel, 23 November. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters      A handout photograph from Israel’s military shows Israeli soldiers taking position at what they say is a tunnel in a location given as Gaza. Photograph: Israel Defense Forces/Reuters      A Palestinian youth walks inside a shrapnel-riddled building damaged in Khan Younis. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty      This picture taken from Rafah overnight shows smoke and fire rising above buildings during Israeli strikes on Khan Younis, one of the areas where Israel has been ordering Palestinians to flee to for safety. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty      People walk on the rubble of a destroyed building after an Israeli strike in Khan Younis. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.47am GMT
block-time published-time 8.33am GMT 
 The UK’s shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has said she urges Hamas to “finally do the right thing” and release the hostages it is holding. 
Speaking on Sky News, she said:
[For] all hostages and their families [it] is just so awful. It’s 7 October. It’s weeks now. Not knowing. Not hearing the conditions of the person you love the most and particularly the children, but also for elderly people who need access to medicine. And they’ve been locked in tunnels in who knows what conditions.
So much hope yesterday that prisoners were going to be released today. Let’s hope it’s tomorrow. Let’s hope that deal can be got across the line.
It is so important that the hostages are released, but also that support is getting into Gaza, but that won’t happen until the hostages are released.
So I urge Hamas, a terrorist organisation, to finally do the right thing and release those hostages.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.47am GMT
block-time published-time 8.29am GMT 
 Al Jazeera is reporting that the Indonesia hospital in Gaza has been evacuated. 
It quotes Sarbini Abdul Murad, head of the Indonesian charity Medical Emergency Rescue Committee (MER-C), saying:
The Indonesia hospital is now empty, and our volunteers have been moved to a school near the European hospital in Rafah. The doctors and the wounded were moved to the European hospital. Our volunteers are sheltering at a school with thousands of others.
More details soon …
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.36am GMT
block-time published-time 8.18am GMT 
 The chief of the general staff of Israel’s armed forces has told soldiers “we are not ending the war”. 
In comments released by Israel’s military, Herzi Halevi, speaking to brigade commanders inside Gaza, said:
We are trying to connect the goals of the war, so that the pressure from the ground operation brings about the ability to also achieve the goal of this war, to create the conditions for the release of the abducted hostages. We are not ending the war. We will continue until we are victorious, going forward and continuing in other Hamas areas. I’m very proud of you, you are doing an outstanding job.
The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials. More are thought to be under rubble.
Israel launched the assault after the Hamas attacks on 7 October inside Israel, which killed at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and during which an estimated 240 people were taken hostage.
It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify the casualty figures being issued during the conflict.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.22am GMT
block-time published-time 7.57am GMT 
 Spain ’s foreign minister, José Manuel Albares, on Thursday said his country is in favour of a humanitarian ceasefire “in the very short term”.
“Our position with regards to Palestine and the Palestinian people is clear. We are in favour of a Palestinian State. In the very short term, what is truly urgent is for a humanitarian ceasefire to happen,” Reuters reports he said in an interview with the Spanish radio station RNE.
This post was amended on Thursday 23 November after Reuters clarified Albares’ quote
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.31am GMT
block-time published-time 7.55am GMT 
 Director of al-Shifa hospital detained by Israel – reports  
 There are reports that the director of the al-Shifa hospital has been detained by Israeli forces. 
Haaretz reports an IDF source has told it Mohammad Abu Salmiya was arrested while in the humanitarian corridor heading to the southern Gaza Strip.
Al Jazeera quotes Khalid Abu Samra, a department head at the hospital, saying: “Mohammad Abu Salmiya was arrested along with several other senior doctors.”
Al Jazeera reports the Israeli Broadcasting Authority has also confirmed the arrest.
More details soon …
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.08am GMT
block-time published-time 7.51am GMT 
AFP has a little more detail on the raids being carried out in Germany in four regions on the homes of members and supporters of Hamas and another Palestinian organisation – Samidoun – which are banned in the country.
The interior ministry said 15 properties had been raided so far since 6am after courts in four regions ordered the raids. Germany on 2 November banned Hamas and Samidoun. There are an estimated 450 Hamas members in Germany, according to official figures.
The ministry said that while Hamas members had not staged “violent action” in Germany so far, they had tried to raise funds to help the group overseas and “influence the social and political discourse in Germany”.
It claimed Samidoun on the other hand was “prone to use violence … and denies the right of Israel to exist”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.08am GMT
block-time published-time 7.29am GMT 
 The US says it has downed drones in the Red Sea that had been launched from Yemen. 
enltrOn the morning (Yemen time) of November 23, the USS Thomas Hudner (DDG 116) shot down multiple one-way attack drones launched from Houthi controlled areas in Yemen. The drones were shot down while the U.S. warship was on patrol in the Red Sea. The ship and crew sustained no… pic.twitter.com/TqXuaKsgwe
 — U.S. Central Command (@CENTCOM) November 23, 2023
Yemen’s Houthis have vowed to continue targeting Israel and what it deems Israeli assets. On Monday Houthi rebels said they had seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship  in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.33am GMT
block-time published-time 7.23am GMT 
 Israel’s military spokesperson Danial Hagari has said   the IDF has again attacked targets inside Lebanon. 
He wrote: “IDF aircraft spotted and attacked an anti-tank squad … At the same time, the IDF force attacked the squad with artillery. Following the warnings in the northern part of the country, a number of launches were detected from Lebanese territory towards Israeli territory.”
The claims have not been independently verified.
There had been indications yesterday that while it was not a direct part of the Israel-Hamas deal, Hezbollah would respect a truce period on the northern boundary between Israel and Lebanon if Israel did. There have been daily exchanges of fire over the UN-drawn blue line that separates the two countries since the 7 October Hamas attack inside Israel.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.25am GMT
block-time published-time 7.19am GMT 
Al Jazeera reports that Munir al-Bursh, the director-general of Gaza’s health ministry, has said Israel has given four hour’s notice to evacuate the  Indonesian hospital  .
The claims have not been independently verified.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.23am GMT
block-time published-time 7.14am GMT 
As part of his visit to Israel, the UK foreign secretary, David Cameron, has been taken to kibbutz Be’eri, one of the sites attacked by Hamas on 7 October in an assault that one of the survivors described as a “pogrom”. 
    The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, and the Israeli foreign minister, Eli Cohen, visit kibbutz Be’eri on 23 November. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters      The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, walks inside a damaged building during his visit to kibbutz Be’eri. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.24am GMT
block-time published-time 7.08am GMT 
 UK foreign secretary David Cameron to visit Israel and Palestine on Thursday  
 The British foreign secretary, David Cameron, is due to visit the Middle East on Thursday and meet Israeli and Palestinian leaders, Britain’s Foreign Office said in a statement, Reuters reports. 
The former prime minister was appointed to the foreign policy brief last week by Rishi Sunak after he moved James Cleverly to the Home Office  following the sacking of Suella Braverman  for her criticisms of the way London’s police were handling pro-Palestinian demonstrations.
Cameron met counterparts from Arab and Islamic countries in London on Wednesday to discuss the Israel-Hamas conflict. In a briefing, the group – from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Indonesia, Turkey, Nigeria and Palestine – said western powers on the UN security council face a choice  of either demanding Israel lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or being complicit in Israeli war crimes and collective punishment.
This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.09am GMT
block-time published-time 7.06am GMT 
In case you missed it earlier, here’s an excerpt from an analysis by our world affairs editor, Julian Borger, and our correspondents Jason Burke and Ruth Michaelson on how the hostage and truce deal was reached  :
The first sign that Hamas was interested in a hostage deal came only a few days after its 7 October attack in which its gunmen killed 1,200 Israelis and took about 240 captive. The government in Qatar approached the White House to convey Hamas’s interest in negotiations, and suggested that a dedicated cell be set up involving a handful of US, Qatari and Israeli representatives, according to senior US officials.
Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, designated his Middle East coordinator, Brett McGurk, and Josh Geltzer, the deputy White House counsel, to set up the cell, which was kept secret from the rest of the administration on Israeli and Qatari insistence.
Biden and his team were focused in particular on 10 US nationals who had not been accounted for and were presumed to be among the hostages. On 13 October, the US president held a Zoom call with their families. A senior administration official said colleagues on the call described it as “one of the most gut-wrenching things they’ve experienced in their time here”.
When Biden visited Israel five days later, he met the families of hostages in person, and their release was a main focus of his face-to-face meeting with Netanyahu, according to US officials. Three Americans were included in the final deal on Wednesday.
Alongside Biden’s personal commitment, the White House came to see the hostage issue as the most likely route to persuading the Israeli government to ease its onslaught on Gaza,  which had flattened entire residential districts and killed thousands of Palestinian civilians.
 Related:  Secrecy and public anger: how the Israel/Hamas ceasefire deal came about
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.17am GMT
block-time published-time 7.01am GMT 
The Israeli military (IDF) says it struck more than 300 “Hamas terror targets” in total over the past day.
In a Telegram post the IDF said it had struck “military command centres, underground terror tunnels, weapon storage facilities, weapon manufacturing sites and anti-tank missile posts”.
It also said Israeli forces were currently striking Jabiliya in northern Gaza, where dozens of people were reported killed on Wednesday.
As we reported earlier , about 50 of the victims in Jabiliya on Wednesday were from the same family, according to Riyad al-Maliki, the Palestinian foreign minister.
block-time published-time 6.51am GMT 
The German interior ministry says it is conducting searches in four federal states in relation to formerly announced bans of activities of Hamas, already a designated terrorist organisation in the country, as well as pro-Palestinian group Samidoun, Reuters reports.
“We continue our consistent action against radical Islamists,” German interior minister Nancy Faeser said in a statement.
“With the bans on Hamas and Samidoun in Germany, we have sent a clear signal that we will not tolerate any glorification or support of the barbaric terror of Hamas against Israel,” Faeser added.
block-time published-time 6.49am GMT 
 Dozens of unidentified Palestinians buried in mass grave in Khan Younis, AFP reports  
The bodies of dozens of unidentified people were buried on Wednesday in a mass grave at a cemetery in Khan Yunis, in the southern Gaza Strip, AFP reports. The agency writes:
Wrapped in blue tarpaulin, the bodies were lowered on stretchers, some of them stained with blood, into a sandy pit that was gradually enlarged by a digger. Some were the size of children.
“As these martyrs had no one to say goodbye to, we dug a mass grave to bury them. They are unknown martyrs,” Bassem Dababesh of the emergency committee at the religious affairs ministry told AFP.
    Palestinians bury unidentified people killed in the Israeli airstrikes in a mass grave in the town of Khan Younis. Photograph: Mohammed Dahman/AP   
The remains, which bore only numbers, had come from the Indonesian and al-Shifa hospitals in the northern Gaza Strip, according to members of the committee at the burial site.
The Indonesian hospital on the edge of the Jabalia refugee camp, which had been hit by Israeli airstrikes, was partly evacuated on Monday, said the Ashraf al-Qudra, spokesperson for the Hamas-controlled health ministry.
“There were bodies everywhere. If I hadn’t seen it with my own eyes I wouldn’t have believed it,” said Umm Mohammed al-Ran, a woman evacuated from the Indonesian hospital towards Rafah in the south.
“Wounded people died in front of us as they bled out,” she told AFP.
    Palestinians pray next to the bodies of 111 unidentified people killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza, during their burial in a mass grave in Khan Younis. Photograph: Mohammed Saber/EPA   
“The stench of death was everywhere in the hospital. The wounded were crying out for painkillers, but the doctors didn’t have any to give them.”
She held up her phone to show a video she had taken. It showed worms crawling from the infected wound on a patient’s leg.
The bodies that arrived at Khan Yunis on Wednesday would have been “detained” by Israel before being released after representations from “third countries and the United Nations”, according to the emergency committee at the religious affairs ministry.
Khalil Siam, director of a transport company, told AFP that the bodies had arrived the night before, and it was not known “if they’re decomposing or not”.
AFP contacted the Israeli military and several UN agencies operating in Gaza, but no reply had been received late Wednesday.
There are thousands of dead in the Gaza Strip, and the question of burials has shocked many Gazans.
Since the war began, war dead have been buried hastily in private plots of land and even a football field, when cemeteries are full or inaccessible because of the fighting.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.05am GMT
block-time published-time 6.34am GMT 
In Australia, hundreds of students have gathered in front of Melbourne’s Flinders Street station, with schoolchildren walking out of class to attend the strike. Some students were draped in the Palestinian flag while others held “Free Palestine” posters.
The students participating in the schools strike spilt out onto the road to block the city’s busy Flinders and Swanston street intersection.
Year 11 student Audra, co-organiser of the rally, told the crowd they must continue to stand with Palestine:
To strike for Palestine, to defy our principals and politicians who tell us we don’t know what we’re talking about.
I walked out of school today with all of you to take a stand on the right side of history.
The rally has attracted backlash, with an open letter from members of the state of Victoria’s Jewish community urging state premier Jacinta Allan and education minister Ben Carroll to take a tougher stance against the strike.
    Students unfurl a Palestinian flag in the shape of a watermelon – a symbol of solidarity with Palestinians – in Melbourne. Photograph: Joel Carrett/AAP   
Allan said she expected students to stay in school while her federal counterpart Jason Clare said pupils should be in the classroom during school hours.
A pro-Palestine schools strike in Sydney is also planned for Friday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.34am GMT
block-time published-time 6.22am GMT 
There is “no cause for concern” about the hostage negotiations, a source familiar with the talks has told Israeli newspaper Haaretz. The source said:
The delay does not stem from a breakdown in talks, but rather from the need to resolve administrative matters, which are being addressed.
block-time published-time 6.13am GMT 
 Announcement on beginning of truce could come within hours, Qatar says  
Qatar’s foreign ministry spokesperson Majid bin Mohammed Al Ansari says an announcement on the beginning of the truce could come in the next few hours, according to Reuters. 
Qatar has been mediating in the negotiations on the truce.
block-time published-time 6.11am GMT 
In its latest update on the conflict, the UN’s humanitarian office (OCHA) said 190 wounded and sick people as well as their companions and a number of medical teams were evacuated on Wednesday from Gaza’s largest hospital, al-Shifa, which was raided by Israeli forces last week.
The Palestine Red Crescent Society reported that, the evacuation lasted for almost 20 hours as the convoy was obstructed and subjected to inspection while passing through the checkpoint that separates northern and southern Gaza, “hence putting the lives of the wounded and sick people in danger.”
It said some 250 patients and staff remained at the hospital, which is no longer operational.
OCHA also said that the Indonesian hospital, also in northern Gaza was hit by “heavy strikes” late Tuesday that hit the surgery department.
Around 60 corpses were lying near the hospital, OCHA added, citing the Hamas-run Ministry of Health in Gaza.
    Palestinians wounded in Israeli strikes lie on the floor of the Indonesian hospital on 16 November. Photograph: Reuters   
The area surrounding Kamal Adwan Hospital in Beit Lahia, northern Gaza was heavily bombarded, resulting in dozens killed, according to media reports on Wednesday, OCHA said.
This is one of the two hospitals north of Wadi Gaza that are still operational and admitting patients. Since last night, it has admitted more than 60 dead and some 1,000 wounded people.
block-time published-time 5.59am GMT 
 Lebanon's Hezbollah group confirms son of senior MP killed in Israeli strike  
Lebanon’s Iran-backed Hezbollah movement has officially confirmed that five of its fighters, including the son of a senior lawmaker, have been killed, amid skirmishes at the Israel-Lebanon border, according to AFP.
Abbas Raad, son of the head of Hezbollah’s parliamentary bloc Mohammed Raad, was “martyred on the road to Jerusalem”, the group said in a statement – the phrase it has been using to announce the death of its members due to Israeli fire since the war started on 7 October.
It issued separate statements with the identities and photographs of four other fighters who were also killed.
A source close to the family said that Abbas Raad “was killed with a number of other Hezbollah members” in an Israeli strike Wednesday on a house in south Lebanon’s Beit Yahun.
Since the Israel-Hamas war began on October 7, the frontier between Lebanon and Israel has seen escalating exchanges of fire, mainly between Israel and Shiite Muslim movement Hezbollah, but also Palestinian groups, raising fears of a broader conflagration.
    A photo taken on Wednesday shows smoke rising from Israeli artillery shelling of the Lebanese border village of Kafr Kila.  Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock   
Israel’s army said in statements Wednesday evening that it had struck a number of Hezbollah targets and sources of fire from Lebanon, including a Hezbollah “terrorist cell” and infrastructure.
Since the cross-border exchanges began, 107 people have been killed on the Lebanese side, according to an AFP tally. At least 75 are Hezbollah fighters but the toll also included at least 14 civilians, three of them journalists. 
Seven Hezbollah fighters have also been killed in Syria.
On the Israeli side, six soldiers and three civilians have been killed, according to authorities.
The strike came just hours after the four-day truce in Gaza was announced between Israel and Hamas, which is a Hezbollah ally.
Iran’s foreign minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, who visited Beirut on Wednesday, warned in an interview that if the Hamas-Israel ceasefire begins but “does not continue... the conditions in the region will not remain the same as before the ceasefire and the scope of the war will expand”.
block-time published-time 5.46am GMT 
 15 Palestinians killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza, Palestinian media reports  
Israeli attacks have continued on Gaza overnight. Palestinian media said early Thursday that Israeli aircraft and artillery struck the southern city of Khan Younis in at least two waves and 15 people were killed. 
Attacks were also reported in several other parts of Gaza, including the Jabaliya refugee camp, north of Gaza City, and the Nuseirat camp in central Gaza.
There was no immediate comment from Israel and Reuters was unable to independently verify the reports.
Israel has told Palestinians to move south for safety but has continued to strike areas such as Khan Younis.
    Palestinians leave the site of an Israeli air strike on a house in Khan Younis on Wednesday. Photograph: Mohammed Salem/Reuters   
On Wednesday, about 160 Palestinians – including 50 from one family – were reported killed. 
Wafa, a Palestinian news agency, said 81 people had been killed since midnight Wednesday as houses were targeted in the centre of the strip. A further 60 were believed to be dead after bombing in and around Jabaliya.
Riyad al-Maliki, the Palestinian foreign minister, said during a visit to London that 52 of the victims at Jabaliya were from the same Qadoura family. “I have the list of the names, 52 of them. They were wiped out completely, from grandfather to grandchildren,” he said.
block-time published-time 5.37am GMT 
 Hostage and ceasefire deal won't be implemented before Friday, US and Israel say  
A long-awaited hostage and ceasefire deal between Israel and Hamas won’t take effect before Friday, US and Israeli officials have said, dashing the hopes of families who thought captives may be freed earlier and prolonging the suffering of Palestinians under bombardment in Gaza.
“The contacts on the release of our hostages are advancing and continuing constantly,” Israeli national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said in a statement. “The start of the release will take place according to the original agreement between the sides, and not before Friday.”
Multiple news outlets later cited anonymous Israeli officials as saying that the halt in fighting would not begin on Thursday either, as had been widely expected.
    Families and supporters of those taken hostage by Hamas demanded their immediate release at a protest in Tel Aviv on Wednesday. Photograph: Shir Torem/Reuters   
White House spokesperson Adrienne Watson later said final logistical details for the release were being worked out. “That is on track and we are hopeful that implementation will begin on Friday morning,” Watson said.
It was not immediately clear what caused the delay. The deal had been expected to come into force from Thursday. An Egyptian security source told Reuters that mediators had sought a start time of 10am.
Here’s our full report on the deal:
 Related:  Israel-Hamas ceasefire and hostage deal won’t happen before Friday, Israeli and US officials say
block-time published-time 5.32am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war with me, Helen Livingstone.
Israeli and US officials have said that the ceasefire and hostage deal will not come into effect until Friday at the earliest.
In a statement released on Wednesday night, Benjamin Netanyahu’s national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said talks on the deal were continuing and that the hostage release “will begin according to the original agreement between the parties, and not before Friday.”
Multiple news outlets later cited anonymous Israeli officials as saying that the halt in fighting would not begin on Thursday either, as had been widely expected.
Israel’s public broadcaster Kan, citing an unidentified Israeli official, reported there was a 24-hour delay because the agreement had not been signed by Hamas and mediator Qatar. The official said they were optimistic the agreement would be carried out once it was signed.
White House spokesperson Adrienne Watson said final logistical details for the hostage release were being worked out. “That is on track and we are hopeful that implementation will begin on Friday morning,” Watson said.
Other key developments:
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.The deal, struck after lengthy and complex talks mediated by Qatar, the US and Egypt, came more than six weeks after the conflict began on 7 October, when Hamas launched attacks from Gaza into southern Israel, killing at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and taking more than 240 people hostage. The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials.Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has warned that “the war continues” despite the deal for a temporary ceasefire and release of some hostages. At a briefing on Wednesday, he also said part of the deal with Hamas stipulates that representatives from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will be allowed to visit the hostages that remain in Gaza after some of them are returned. The ICRC earlier on Wednesday said it had “not been made aware of any agreement…related to visits by the ICRC to the hostages”.A coalition of aid agencies have warned that the four-day ceasefire left almost no time to provide effective humanitarian relief to Gaza’s 2.3 million people.  In a briefing on Wednesday, they argued the only effective response would be a permanent or durable end to the war and that it remained unclear if there would be sufficient access, particularly to the north of the strip, to allow anything beyond cursory relief.Palestinian and Israeli officials have published the names of 300 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, at least some of whom are expected to be released in an exchange with Hamas in Gaza for dozens of Israeli hostages seized by the militant group on 7 October.The families of hostages held in Gaza have said they are living in a “nightmare” as they endure an agonising wait to see if their loves ones are among those freed.  The relatives of some of the 240 hostages in Gaza have said they were in the dark about who would be released and when. Meanwhile, excitement is also growing for Palestinians in occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank that their imprisoned loved ones may also be coming home.More than 100 Palestinians in Gaza – including 50 from one family – were reported killed on Wednesday as Israeli forces continued attacking across the strip from land, sea and air. Wafa, a Palestinian news agency, said 81 people had been killed since midnight as houses were targeted in the centre of the strip. A further 60 were believed to be dead after bombing in and around the Jabaliya refugee camp in the north.The head of the UN children’s agency (Unicef) has called the Gaza Strip “the most dangerous place in the world to be a child” and said that the temporary ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas is “far from enough”. Catherine Russell, addressing the UN security council on Wednesday, also said that “all children inside the territory” were facing “what could soon become a catastrophic nutrition crisis”.The number of journalists killed in the Israel-Hamas conflict since 7 October has increased to at least 53, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).  The funerals were held in Beirut on Wednesday for Al Mayadeen’s reporter Farah Omar and camera operator Rabih al Mamari who were both killed by an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon on Tuesday.Lebanon’s Iran-backed Hezbollah movement officially confirmed that five of its fighters, including the son of a senior lawmaker, have been killed, amid skirmishes at the Israel-Lebanon border, according to AFP. Abbas Raad, son of the head of Hezbollah’s parliamentary bloc Mohammed Raad, was “martyred on the road to Jerusalem”, the group said in a statement – the phrase it has been using to announce the death of its members due to Israeli fire since the war started on 7 October.Israel’s military has said it intercepted a cruise missile near the southern port city of Eilat.  Eilat is in the south of Israel at the northern tip of the Red Sea, and has previously been targeted during the conflict both by long range fire from the Gaza Strip and by Yemen’s Houthi forces.The western powers on the UN security council face a choice of either demanding Israel lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or being complicit in Israeli war crimes and collective punishment, foreign ministers from Arab and Muslim countries said on a visit to London on Wednesday.Pope Francis has faced criticism for allegedly drawing equivalence between Israel and Hamas.  During a general audience after meeting with Israeli and Palestinian delegations at the Vatican, the pope reportedly remarked: “They suffer so much, I heard how they both suffer.” He went on: “Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond war: this is not war, it is terrorism.”

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Number of Palestinians killed is ‘truly unbearable’, says Spanish PM
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 11:08 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 757 words
Byline: Sam Jones
Highlight: Pedro Sánchez says all civilians must be protected in Israel-Hamas war and reiterates call for two-state solutionIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has urged Israel to rethink its offensive in Gaza, telling its president and prime minister the number of dead Palestinians is “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians, including thousands of children”.
Sánchez’s blunt pleas came during a visit to the Middle East with the Belgian prime minister, Alexander de Croo, during which he called for a peace conference and reiterated that the creation of a Palestinian state remained the best way to bring peace and security to the region.
Israel says 1,200 people were killed and 239 taken hostage when Hamas fighters crossed the border from Gaza on 7 October. According to the Hamas-run health ministry in Gaza, more than 14,100 people have been killed in Israel’s retaliatory strikes.
Speaking as he met Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday afternoon, Sánchez said Spain had repeatedly condemned Hamas’s “shocking acts of terrorism” and acknowledged Israel’s right to defend itself.
But he added: “Let me also be clear: Israel must abide by international law, including international humanitarian law, in its response … The whole world is shocked at the images that we see coming from Gaza every day. The number of Palestinians killed is truly unbearable. I believe that all civilians must be protected at all costs.”
Sánchez said “a serious and credible prospect for peace” was more necessary than ever. “Without a political settlement, we are bound to run again into a never-ending cycle of violence.”
Earlier, the Spanish prime minister had made a similar request of Israel’s president, Isaac Herzog, once again stressing Israel’s obligation to follow international humanitarian law.
“Israel, as we’ve said since the beginning of these terrible attacks, has the right to defend itself,” he said. “But it must also comply with international law, including international humanitarian law. The response cannot imply the deaths of innocent civilians in Gaza, including thousands of children. We need to urgently stop the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza.”
Sánchez added that a comprehensive solution needed to be found that included “the establishment of a viable Palestinian state”.
Sánchez said the Palestinian authorities should take control of Gaza when the war ended. “The two-state solution should be implemented to defeat terrorism and guarantee Israel’s security,” he said.
He called for an international peace conference to be held as soon as possible, adding: “We need to achieve the establishment of a viable Palestinian state. Israelis and Palestinians have the right to live in peace and security.”
Sánchez and De Croo were expected to meet the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, on Thursday afternoon, before travelling to Egypt for talks with President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi.
Spain, which currently holds the EU presidency, has already said it is ready to hold a peace conference on the conflict. On Thursday, the country’s foreign minister, José Manuel Albares, told state radio RNE: “The definitive solution is the existence of a Palestinian state that guarantees Israel’s security.” He said Spain was “in favour of recognising” a Palestinian state.
Relations between Spain and Israel have been fraught over recent weeks  after some far-left members of Sánchez’s previous cabinet criticised Israel’s reaction to the terrorist atrocities, suggesting it was committing war crimes in Gaza and calling for Netanyahu to be brought before the international criminal court.
Israel’s embassy in Madrid described the remarks as “deeply immoral” and accused some Spanish MPs of aligning themselves with “Isis-style terrorism”.
Spain responded with its own strongly worded statement that accused the Israeli embassy of “spreading falsehoods” about some cabinet members.
“In a full democracy, such as Spain, any political leader can freely express their positions as the representative of a political party,” the statement from the foreign ministry said.
“In any case, the Spanish government’s position on the terrorist attacks carried out by Hamas is clear: unequivocal condemnation; demands for the immediate and unconditional release of the hostages, and the recognition of Israel to defend itself within the limits set by international law and international humanitarian law.”
Spain’s stated desire to recognise a Palestinian state would follow similar official recognition from Sweden, Iceland, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Slovakia, Hungary, Malta, Poland and Romania.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Gaza ceasefire to begin on Friday morning with hostage releases to follow
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 4:25 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1441 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Negotiators work out final details of four-day truce between Israel and Hamas after seven weeks of conflictIsrael-Hamas war: live updatesIsrael and Palestine: a complete guide to the crisis
Body


A four-day <span class=">ceasefire in Gaza between Israel and Hamas will begin on Friday morning, a day later than originally announced, after negotiators worked out final details of the deal, which will lead to the release of dozens of hostages held by militants as well as Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.
                     <span class=">The diplomatic breakthrough promises the first pause in seven weeks of war in Gaza and some relief both for the 2.3 million Palestinians in the territory who have endured intensive Israeli bombardment, and for families in Israel fearful for the fate of their loved ones taken captive during the bloody attack launched last month by Hamas that triggered the conflict.
The exchange of female and child hostages and prisoners was due to take place on Thursday but was postponed as last-minute logistical issues were worked out during 24 hours of frantic diplomacy.
Sources close to the negotiations said Israel had presented a series of late requests for clarification of practical issues, and demanded the full identification of the hostages Hamas intended to release.
Communication between the parties has to pass from Israeli officials to Qatar, then to Hamas leaders outside Gaza and finally those inside the territory, a process that slowed any resolution of outstanding issues, the sources said.
On Thursday, Majed al-Ansari, the spokesperson for the foreign ministry of Qatar, announced the ceasefire would start at 7am local time on Friday (0500 GMT).
He said the two sides had exchanged lists of those to be released, and the first group of hostages held by Hamas – 13 women and children – would be freed on Friday afternoon. Increased aid for Palestinians would start to enter “as soon as possible”, Ansari said.
The senior Israeli official in charge of arrangements for the hostage release, Brig Gen Gal Hirsch, confirmed Israel had received a list of the names of the hostages to be freed.
“Liaison officers have informed all of those families whose loved ones appear on the list, as well as all of the hostages’ families,” Hirsch said.
Reports in Israel  suggest the hostages will be released across the Rafah border crossing into Egypt and then be brought to Israel by the International Committee of the Red Cross and the Red Crescent (ICRC).
The truce, initially lasting four or five days, was announced early on Wednesday  after days of speculation and has raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  it has held since launching bloody attacks into southern Israel on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
There will be a halt to Israeli military flights over southern Gaza, with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the truce, according to a Hamas statement.
Hamas is understood to be particularly concerned by the prospect of surveillance by drones during the release of hostages, a process that would expose their militants and potentially some of their infrastructure or even whereabouts of key leaders.
The hostages to be freed are women and children, and the Palestinian prisoners are also women and children, both sides have confirmed.
If the first exchanges go well, and Hamas can locate more female hostages or children, there will be further releases on both sides, reports suggest. Some sources have suggested the ceasefire could run for up to 10 days.
The deal, struck after lengthy and complex talks mediated by Qatar , the US and Egypt, comes more than six weeks after the conflict began last month. At least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, were killed in the Hamas attacks on 7 October, and more than 240 people taken hostage.
The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials. More are thought to be under rubble. Swaths of northern Gaza have been destroyed in the fighting, and up to a million people displaced.
Israel says it has killed thousands of Hamas fighters, without presenting evidence for its count.
Ahead of the ceasefire, fighting continued at even greater than normal intensity, with Israeli jets hitting more than 300 targets and troops engaged in heavy fighting around Jabalia refugee camp north of Gaza City.
NGOs working with Palestinian prisoners said the arrangements for their release from Israeli jails was unclear even as late as Thursday evening, with continuing discussions about where they would be freed by Israeli authorities.
The prisoners to be freed are understood to come from across the occupied West Bank.
Ansari did not give details on how many Palestinian women and children will be released from Israeli jails on Friday or when this would take place. He said Doha expected they would be released by Israel as part of this reciprocal deal.
An operations room in Doha will monitor the truce and the release of hostages and has direct and real-time lines of communication with Israel, the Hamas political office in Doha and the ICRC.
“The important thing is that we maintain a very clear line of communication with everybody through the operations room and make sure that the environment which the hostage transfer will happen will be a safe one … We all hope that this truce will lead to a chance to start a wider work to achieve a permanent truce,” Ansari said.
Obtaining full details identity of hostages has been a problem throughout the negotiations, which may indicate Hamas does not hold or have access to all the hostages, some observers say.
Though the deal has raised hopes of a more durable cessation of hostilities Netanyahu has vowed it will be temporary and will not end the campaign to destroy Hamas.  
The Israeli defence minister, Yoav Gallant, said during a visit to a naval base on Thursday: “This will be a short respite, at the end of which the fighting will continue intensely, and we will create pressure to bring back more hostages. At least another two months of fighting is expected.”
The delay in implementing the ceasefire dismayed uprooted Palestinians in Gaza, who hope to use the few days of quiet to visit homes they had fled – or what remains of them – and find missing relatives.
“We’d been waiting and hoping since yesterday,” said Aya Hamad, who is sheltering at a hospital in the central city of Deir al-Balah. “We wanted to go home to get a change of clothes for our children, even though we know our homes have been bombed … It’s all for nothing.”
Israeli troops hold much of northern Gaza and say they have dismantled tunnels and much of Hamas’s infrastructure there.
Al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City, the territory’s largest medical centre, has been the focus of <span class=">a fierce battle of narratives over both sides’ allegedly reckless endangerment of civilians. Hamas and hospital staff deny Israeli allegations that the facility was used as a militant command centre and that the group systematically uses civilians as a human shield.
Israeli soldiers on Wednesday escorted journalists to a tunnel shaft they said was part of a vast underground network used by Hamas for military purposes – a claim Hamas denies.
Israeli military spokesperson Col Richard Hecht said combat operations would continue “until we are given the order to hold our fire”. The Israeli military has said it is pursuing Hamas fighters in Jabaliya, a dense urban district adjacent to Gaza City that has come under intense bombardment for weeks.
For Hamas, the ceasefire would provide an opportunity to regroup after weeks of apparently heavy losses. The release of Palestinian prisoners will also be a major propaganda coup for Hamas. Its leader in Gaza, Yahya Sinwar, is likely to declare victory if the war ends now.
Netanyahu and the Israeli military want to push ahead with the offensive, in the belief that military pressure on Hamas will force concessions and eventually the release of all the hostages.
Hezbollah, the Lebanon-based militant Islamist militia and political movement, was not part of the recent negotiations, but has said it will join the ceasefire nonetheless. Tensions remain high on Israel’s northern border, with constant exchanges of fire.
Early on Thursday, Hezbollah announced that five fighters had been killed including the son of the head of Hezbollah’s parliamentary bloc. Israel said it had eliminated a “terrorist cell”.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




There’s a big reason Joe Biden is losing younger voters: Israel and Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 11:09 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:1
Length: 1242 words
Byline: Moira Donegan
Highlight: The US president’s hawkish support for Israel has alienated younger voters, progressives, and Arab and Muslim Americans
Body


The 2024 presidential contest should not be close. Joe Biden’s opponent, Donald Trump, is a bigot, a liar and a crook, with dozens of credible sexual assault allegations, a disastrous track record of enabling sadistic racism in both his policy and his rhetoric, a frank admission of his own authoritarian ambitions, and 92 pending felony charges.
The Republican party that the former president leads has become beholden to a small but extremely powerful base of voters with wildly unpopular social views, particularly regarding abortion – views that have driven the Republicans to election losses in virtually all major contests since the summer of 2022. Voters hate them, and reject their vision for the US; few politicians have ever been so unpopular as Trump is, and few political platforms have ever seemed so determined to alienate and anger voters as the Republican party’s.
Yet Joe Biden could lose. If the election were held today, it’s likely that he would. Much was made of a New York Times/Siena poll , published earlier this month, that showed the US president losing to Trump in five key swing states. The Biden campaign largely downplayed the numbers, shrugging that the election is far away.
Now, a new NBC poll also shows Biden in dire straits, with his approval rating falling to the lowest it has ever been: 40%. The poll found that he was faring especially poorly with Democrats and young voters, large numbers of whom are dissatisfied with his handling of an issue that is exposing a growing divide within the party: Israel’s assault on Palestinians in Gaza following the October 7 Hamas attack. 
From nearly the first moments of Israel’s war, the Biden administration has staunchly supported its Middle East ally, and allowed little public daylight between their own official statements and those of Israel’s rightwing prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. The aid and arms deals continue to flow to Israel unconditioned, even as Israeli bombings have now killed more than 14,000 Palestinians in Gaza, including more than 5,000 children and displaced upwards of a million people.
The hawkish support for Israel’s war has been intense, with rhetoric from the White House often appearing indifferent or outright hostile to concerns about the deaths of Palestinian civilians. On 10 October, Biden’s press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre  described calls for a ceasefire as “wrong”, “repugnant” and “disgraceful”. “There are not two sides here,” Jean-Pierre said, signaling that the White House would not brook any concern for Palestinian lives.
In an especially disturbing moment, Biden himself cast doubt on the official death toll from the Gaza health ministry – saying on 27 October that he had “ no confidence  in the number the Palestinians are using” – even though figures from this agency have been previously deemed reliable  by the United Nations and international human rights agencies. The implication seemed to be that the Palestinians were cynically overstating the number of their dead, and that the real number was some smaller, supposedly more acceptable figure.
Since he made that comment, the Palestinian casualties in Gaza are said to have nearly doubled. It’s unclear whether Biden believes it.
As the corpses pile up and Gaza’s buildings tumble down, the Biden administration has seemed to hedge on this unqualified pro-Israel, pro-war stance, at least at the margins. People identified as “administration officials” have given off-the-record quotes expressing “ frustration  ” and “ concern  ” with the Israelis’ determination to press forward with a Gaza invasion without any long-term plan for the region. Asked if the Israelis were making any real effort to minimize civilian casualties, the US national security council spokesman, John Kirby, said: “We have seen some indications that there are efforts being applied in certain situations to try to minimize, but I don’t want to overstate that.”
Alon Pinkas of Haaretz interpreted  those remarks as a signal of a growing distaste for the Israeli operation within the Biden US security state. This is what amounts to distancing from the Biden administration when it comes to Israel’s operation in Gaza: hedged off-the-record statements about long-term strategy, and a single response to a question of whether Israel is acting as if it cares about preserving innocent Palestinian lives that amounts to a coded and heavily euphemistic “no”.
That’s the official line. But there are growing indications that the Democratic party is heading for a revolt over the issue. Young voters are not the only ones who are angry. Arab and Muslim American voters are voicing outrage at Biden’s stance, endangering his re-election prospects nationwide but especially in the crucial battleground state of Michigan , which is home to a large Muslim American voting bloc.
Even within the party bureaucracy itself, there are signs of trouble. The state department has fielded an unusual number of internal complaint memos  about US policy over the issue; large numbers of Democratic congressional staffers  joined a Washington DC protest calling for a ceasefire.
The House voted to censure  representative Rashida Tlaib, of Michigan, the only Palestinian American in Congress, over her calls for Palestinian liberation – particularly her use of the phrase “from the river to the sea”, which Tlaib explained was a call for peace, freedom, dignity and equality for all in the region, but which her detractors alleged was an antisemitic call for Jewish elimination. (Such has been the nature of much of the debate around the conflict in the halls of US power: arguments over rhetoric have frequently distracted from substantive issues of policy.)
But that did not stop  a growing number of her fellow Democratic members of Congress from joining her in calls for a ceasefire. The White House may be calling them “repugnant”, but the pro-ceasefire camp in Congress looks more and more like the future of the Democratic party: it is younger, it is further to the left, and it is majority non-white.
Handwringing about Biden’s age and its relevance is overstated. But few issues have done more to highlight the problem of gerontocracy within the Democratic party, and of the growing generational gap in US politics, than this internal dispute over Israel-Palestine. In a way, the divide between Biden and his loyalists on the one hand, and the pro-ceasefire left and Democratic base on the other, might be a matter of historical references.
Biden comes from a generation that came of age much closer in time to the Holocaust; he is in that sense perhaps more acutely aware of Jewish vulnerability – and certainly more convinced that Zionism’s nationalist project can mitigate it – than younger people are. The younger staffers, state department functionaries, members of Congress, and voters, meanwhile, are not thinking of the second world War, but of the war on terror; of September 11, and the disastrous, brutal and ultimately futile wars of revenge that the US fought in its aftermath.
Each side is proceeding from what they feel are the definitive lessons of their era – the 20th century for Biden, and the 21st century for the pro-ceasefire camp. The results of the next election may well depend on whether they can find each other in time. 
                                                               Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnist                                                         

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




David Cameron expresses hopes over temporary truce during visit to Israel
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 6:03 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 633 words
Byline: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor
Highlight: UK foreign secretary hopes situation will provide opportunity to ‘get hostages out and get aid into Gaza’Israel-Hamas war – live updates
Body


David Cameron has met Benjamin Netanyahu and the Israeli president, Isaac Herzog, during a visit to Israel, expressing hope that the planned temporary truce with Hamas would be an “opportunity to crucially get hostages out and get aid into Gaza”.
The ceasefire is due to begin on Friday morning from 7am local time, with aid “going in as soon as possible”, according to Qatari officials. The first set of civilians held captive by Hamas are expected to be freed at about 4pm local time on Friday, including 13 women and children.
The Israeli prime minister told the new UK foreign secretary that the precondition for peace in the Middle East was the eradication of what Netanyahu called the “genocidal terrorist cult” Hamas. His remarks gave the impression that Netanyahu is not currently interested in anything but a military solution to the future of Israel’s security.
Cameron’s visit to Jerusalem and Ramallah, the headquarters of the Palestinian Authority, came on another dramatic day surrounding the release of hostages, and Palestinian political prisoners.
The UK foreign secretary was determined to visit Israel a little more than a week into his new job to show his solidarity with the country over the Hamas terrorist attack.
He visited the Be’eri kibbutz, scene of some of the worst violence during the Hamas assault of 7 October, during which 1,200 people were killed and 240 hostages taken, saying: “There is never any excuse for this sort of hostage-taking.
“All the hostages should be released, but I hope that everyone who is responsible and behind this agreement can make it happen, to bring relief to those families, including, of course, there are British nationals who have been taken hostage.”
More than 130 people were killed in the kibbutz, which is only 8 miles (13km) from the Gaza border.
Netanyahu insisted Israel would press on with its plans to destroy Hamas, saying: “We’ll continue with our war aims, namely to eradicate Hamas, because Hamas has already promised that they will do this again and again and again. They’re a genocidal terrorist cult. There’s no hope for peace between Israel and the Palestinians, between Israel and the Arab states, if we don’t eradicate this murderous movement that threatens the future of all of us.”
It is understood Cameron discussed the impact of the conflict on civilians and the need to take all possible measures to minimise civilian casualties, and urged the Israelis to take action to end settler violence in the West Bank. The UK foreign secretary highlighted the need to use the Kerem Shalom border crossing to scale up scanning and inspections to get more trucks in to Gaza.
In London, John Casson, Cameron’s former chief foreign policy adviser in Downing Street, criticised Netanyahu’s strategy, saying it was teaching hatred of Israel among Palestinians. He also called for a change to the ageing leadership of the Palestinian Authority.
In his main critique, he argued it was right to say “we stand with Israelis and say ‘never again’ to facing the terrorist horror of the last month – that is not the same as to say we endorse and enable what Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his partners are saying and doing because the two things are at odds.
“The current approach is not making the Israelis safe and secure for the long term but creating a traumatised generation of Palestinians and teaching them that Israel is their enemy and it is undermining the prospects of a two-state solution and deliberately dismantling it.”
Spain’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, also visited Israel  on Thursday, telling Netanyahu and Herzog that the number of dead Palestinians was “truly unbearable”, and that the response to Hamas’s terrorist attacks last month cannot include “the deaths of innocent civilians, including thousands of children”.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Israel arrests Gaza hospital director and bombs 300 targets amid truce delay
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 3:44 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 664 words
Byline: Dan Sabbagh in Jerusalem
Highlight: IDF claims al-Shifa hospital was Hamas command and control centre as footage of tunnels and underground rooms appearsIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Israel’s army has arrested the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital and bombed at least 300 targets from the air, killing dozens of Palestinians, as an agreed four-day truce was delayed until Friday. 
Mohammad abu Salmiya and other medics were detained, a colleague said, amid reports that members of the Israel Defence Forces (IDF) had seized them as they were travelling with a World Health Organization evacuation convoy.
“Dr Mohammad abu Salmiya was arrested along with several other senior doctors,” Khalid abu Samra told the AFP news agency, while Gaza’s ministry of health demanded the WHO explain what had happened. 
Several hours later the IDF confirmed Abu Salmiya had been arrested and transferred to the Shin Bet domestic security service for further questioning. It said that al-Shifa “under his direct management, served as a Hamas command and control centre” and that Hamas fighters had sought refuge in the hospital.
Abu Salmiya was regularly interviewed as Israeli forces attacked Gaza after 7 October, describing a desperately overcrowded facility housing 650 patients and sheltering another 5,000. He described allegations that al-Shifa sat above a Hamas command centre as untrue. 
Al-Shifa, the largest medical facility in Gaza, was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces over a week ago. Israel has repeatedly claimed that Hamas ran a command and control centre from tunnels running near and under the hospital, although so far the evidence presented has fallen short of that. 
The IDF took a group of journalists to visit the tunnels on Wednesday, and video reports  appeared showing lengthy tunnels reinforced with concrete blocks. A bathroom and an empty tiled room with electric sockets could be seen on the footage , although its purpose could not be discerned from the filmed material.
Daniel Hagari, the IDF’s spokesperson, said on Wednesday evening the footage showed that “Hamas built tunnels underneath hospitals, used them to command their operations”, and accused the group of “using the protected status of the hospitals as a shield”.
Patients and civilians have since been gradually evacuated from al-Shifa including the hospital’s boss on Thursday, a day in which intense fighting continued unabated across Gaza as the planned truce was delayed by nearly 24 hours. Qatar said on Thursday that the truce would start at 7am local time (5am GMT) on Friday.
The Palestinian Wafa news agency reported that dozens had been killed in Israeli bombing raids in Nuseirat and its camp in the central Gaza Strip, and in Jabaliya in the north, which has been the scene of days of heavy fighting on the ground. Among those reported killed in Nuseirat was a photojournalist, Mohammad Moin Ayyash, and his family.
Israel’s air force said in the early morning that it bombed 300 targets over the past 24 hours, while the IDF said ground forces were fighting against Hamas in the northern Gaza Strip using tanks and drones. The military released fresh bodycam footage showing soldiers operating among rubble and destroyed buildings in the Shati quarter of Gaza City.
A second hospital in northern Gaza, the Indonesia hospital, has now been evacuated at the insistence of Israel’s military, according to the Indonesian charity Medical Emergency Rescue Committee (MER-C), which helped fund and build it. Gaza’s health ministry said the evacuation meant that 65 bodies at the facility remained unburied.
Hamas has agreed to exchange at least 50 mostly Israeli hostages it holds, in return for a four-day pause in fighting and the release of 150 Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli jails.  The truce could be extended if more prisoners are released by Hamas, but Israeli leaders insist fighting will eventually restart. 
On Thursday, Herzi Halevi, the IDF’s chief of staff, visited brigade commanders inside Gaza and insisted the war would continue. “We are not ending the war. We will continue until we are victorious, going forward and continuing in other Hamas areas,” he said.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Melbourne school students defy education minister and strike in support of Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 6:30 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 581 words
Byline: Adeshola Ore
Highlight: Hundreds rally in CBD to call for an end to the war in Gaza and for Australia to stop military aid to IsraelFollow our Australia news live blog for latest updatesGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


Amid chants of “free, free Palestine”, hundreds of Victoria school students have walked out of classrooms to call for an immediate end to the war in Gaza  and for Australia to stop military aid to Israel.
Students gathered at the steps of Flinders Street station in the Melbourne CBD on Thursday afternoon, rallying for Palestine. The crowd spilled out on to the road, bringing traffic to a standstill at the busy Flinders and Swanston Street intersection.
Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup
They then marched along Swanston Street and into Melbourne Central, where they staged a sit-in.
Year 11 student Audra, a co-organiser of the rally, told the crowd to continue standing with Palestine and “defy our principals and politicians who tell us we don’t know what we’re talking about”.
“I walked out of school today with all of you to take a stand on the right side of history,” Audra said.
Students unveiled a giant watermelon flag, in the colours of the Palestinian flag. A watermelon is a symbol of Palestinian identity and resistance.
Mother of two Michelle Coleman, attended the rally with her two daughters, Eva, 11 and Dane, 9, who were students at Caulfield primary school.
Eva said she “wanted to help everyone in Gaza and Palestine”.
Coleman, a child of a Palestinian refugee, said she wanted her children to be proud of their heritage.
“I want them to understand their identity and understand its OK to fight for human rights of all people,” she said
“It’s incredible to see so many students and young people who are aware and connected. It’s such a peaceful environment.”
Norah, a year 9 student from Pascoe Vale Girls College, said she wanted to “stand for what’s right”.
Ivy Bertram, a 16-year-old student and a co-organiser of the School Strike for Palestine, said students were conscious of the Israel-Hamas conflict
“I hope the message is sent to parliament to say we want a complete ceasefire and a free Palestine. We want justice for Palestine,” she said.
Bertram said attending the protest was “so much more important than half a day of school”.
“Doing this, you learn about the world and you learn about life,” she said.
Some students were draped in the Palestinian flag, while other held signs which read “Stop Israel’s genocide now” and “Free Palestine”.
Victoria police estimate a total crowd of 500 people at the rally.
Pro-Palestine school strikes are planned for Friday in Sydney, Wollongong and Byron Bay.
The organisation of such rallies in Australian cities, inspired by mass school strikes in the US and the UK , has attracted backlash.
Members of Victoria’s Jewish community penned an open letter to the premier, Jacinta Allan, and the education minister, Ben Carroll, urging them to take a tougher stance against the Melbourne strike and warned they could heighten division and increase fear among Jewish students.
Allan previously said she expected students to stay in school, while her federal counterpart, Jason Clare, said pupils should be in the classroom during school hours
Meanwhile, the electoral office of the federal NDIS minister, Bill Shorten, was the target of graffiti that read “dial down the apartheid Bill”.
Shorten last week urged protesters to “dial down the degree of aggro” after activists dumped fake bloody corpses outside the electorate offices of federal Labor MPs.
Last Friday, students across the country walked out of classrooms to demand stronger action on climate change. 
– With AAP

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Together for Humanity plans mass vigil to bridge divisions over Israel-Gaza war
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 7:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: UK NEWS; Version:1
Length: 529 words
Byline: Harriet Sherwood
Highlight: Coalition of political, faith and community leaders aims to combat extremism and bring people together
Body


A coalition of political, faith and civil society leaders is attempting to bridge divisions over the Israel-Gaza war that are threatening community cohesion, according to its co-founder, Brendan Cox.
Together for Humanity  is organising a mass vigil on 3 December, bringing together people who have lost family in Gaza with people who have lost loved ones in Israel in an acknowledgment of the pain and grief on both sides of the conflict.
Faith and community leaders will also address the vigil in London. Organisers hope that thousands of members of the public will attend. No placards or flags are allowed at the event.
“The hurt and pain on both sides of this [war] is so overwhelming that people are not able to acknowledge a shared sense of grief and suffering,” said Cox. “And then there are people who are willing to exploit the situation to peddle antisemitism or Islamophobia. The most extreme voices are dominating the conversation.”
Most people feel empathy for the parents who have lost their child in Israel or Gaza, he said.
“But a relatively small group of people on either end of the spectrum who are very vociferously supporting Israel or the Palestinian cause are dominating debate and also saying: ‘You’re either with us or against us. It’s a binary choice’.
“And then you have a ramping-up of tension; extremists using people’s emotion and grief to power their own hatred. The risk with that – and the reason that I feel it so viscerally – is that it makes extreme people more likely to do extreme things. So the risk of attacks, whether on MPs, or members of the public, or a synagogue or a mosque, is heightened.”
Cox’s wife, the Labour MP Jo Cox, was murdered by a rightwing extremist during the Brexit referendum campaign in 2016. Cox has since campaigned for community cohesion through Together , a coalition chaired by Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury.
Together for Humanity was the result of “very strong and very positive” responses to a post by Cox on X, formerly Twitter, asking if there was interest in “trying to draw together people who want to safeguard our shared humanity, who wants to be really clear that even if you’ve got very strong views for one side or another, it doesn’t mean the other side is evil”.
Its first event was a small vigil in Downing Street on 17 November, at which Magen Inon, a London-based teacher whose parents were killed by Hamas on 7 October, said: “I pray that no more innocent lives are lost, for the hostages to be safely back home and for the war, all wars, to end.”
Layla Moran, a Lib Dem MP of Palestinian heritage, spoke of her grief at hearing shortly before the vigil that a family member in Gaza had died after being unable to access hospital treatment. She added: “I feel closer to those in Israel who have also lost loved ones in this tragedy.”
Cox said that many people felt “paralysed because they’re scared they’re going to be called antisemitic or Islamophobic, or pro-Palestinian or pro-Israeli, or just get it wrong in some way”. Together for Humanity aspired to become a national movement, offering support, speakers and background material to local groups that want to bridge divides, he said.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Melissa Barrera, fired from Scream VII over Israel-Hamas posts, responds: ‘Silence is not an option’
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 10:35 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FILM; Version:1
Length: 631 words
Byline: Guardian staff
Highlight: The actor said she condemned antisemitism and Islamophobia, after being dropped from the horror film franchise for social media posts interpreted as antisemitic
Body


Scream franchise star Melissa Barrera has publicly responded to being fired from Scream VII for sharing posts that the film’s production company says were interpreted as antisemitic. The actor said that she condemned antisemitism and Islamophobia but would “continue to speak out” on the Israel-Hamas conflict.
Barrera, who starred in the fifth and sixth Scream films and was set to star in the forthcoming seventh instalment, has been outspoken in support of Palestine on social media, where she has described Israel as committing “genocide” and “brutally killing innocent Palestinians, mothers and children, under the pretence of destroying Hamas”.
“Western media only shows the [Israeli] side. Why do they do that, I will let you deduce for yourself,” she wrote on 22 October, adding: “We don’t need more hate. No Islamophobia. No antisemitism.”
On Tuesday, Barrera was fired from Scream VII by production company Spyglass Media, who confirmed to Variety  that the decision was due to some of her social media posts, which were interpreted as antisemitic.
“We have zero tolerance for antisemitism or the incitement of hate in any form, including false references to genocide, ethnic cleansing, Holocaust distortion or anything that flagrantly crosses the line into hate speech,” a Spyglass spokesperson told Variety. The Guardian has not confirmed which posts Spyglass was referring to.
In a since-deleted post to X on Tuesday, Scream VII director Christopher Landon wrote: “This is my statement: Everything sucks. Stop yelling. This was not my decision to make.”
On Wednesday, Barrera issued a statement on Instagram stories. “First and foremost I condemn antisemitism and Islamophobia. I condemn hate and prejudice of any kind against any group of people.
“As a Latina, a proud Mexicana, I feel the responsibility of having a platform that allows me the privilege of being heard, and therefore I have tried to use it to raise awareness about issues I care about and to lend my voice to those in need,” she continued.
“Every person on this earth … deserves equal human rights, dignity and, of course, freedom. I believe a group of people are NOT their leadership, and that no governing body should be above criticism.
“I pray day and night for no more deaths, for no more violence, and for peaceful co-existence. I will continue to speak out for those that need it most and continue to advocate for peace and safety, for human rights and freedom. Silence is not an option for me.”
Scream VII was thrown into further disarray on Wednesday when Barrera’s co-star Jenna Ortega reportedly pulled out of the film  due to a scheduling conflict with the second season of Netflix show Wednesday. Ortega and Barrera both starred in the previous two Scream films as sisters Tara and Sam Carpenter.
Barrera is the latest person in Hollywood to come under fire for posts and actions in relation to the war between Israel and Hamas.
On Tuesday, Susan Sarandon was dropped from Hollywood talent agency UTA  after speaking at a pro-Palestine rally. The Oscar-winning actor drew criticism for saying: “There are a lot of people afraid of being Jewish at this time, and are getting a taste of what it feels like to be a Muslim in this country.”
And last month, Maha Dakhil, the co-head of film at Hollywood agency CAA, resigned from the agency’s board after a backlash to her shared Instagram posts that read, in part: “What’s more heartbreaking than witnessing genocide? Witnessing the denial that genocide is happening.” Screenwriter Aaron Sorkin subsequently announced  he was leaving CAA, saying “Maha isn’t an antisemite, she’s just wrong.”
Dakhil later issued a public apology.  “I made a mistake with a repost in my Instagram, which used hurtful language,” she said. “I’m sorry for the pain I have caused.”

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Afternoon Update: Bruce Lehrmann testifies in defamation lawsuit; Israel-Hamas ceasefire delayed; and Christmas gifts under $50
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 5:42 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 875 words
Byline: Antoun Issa
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Afternoon Update here, and start your day with our Morning Mail newsletter.
Body


Good afternoon. Bruce Lehrmann took the stand in the federal court  today to deny sexually assaulting Brittany Higgins in Parliament House. It is the second day of his defamation lawsuit against Network Ten.
Lehrmann’s barrister, Steven Whybrow SC, asked: “Did you sexually assault Brittany Higgins in that office on that evening?”
Lehrmann: “Absolutely not.”
Whybrow: “Did you see her again after she turned right?”
Lehrmann: “I did not.”
Lehrmann said he thought the Friday night in question “was an innocuous evening”.
                   Top news                                                                   Ceasefire delayed | A senior Israeli official has said that the planned exchange of some Palestinians held in Israeli prisons for Israeli hostages in Hamas has been delayed until at least Friday. There are now reports  a ceasefire has also been delayed. To the north, an Israeli strike yesterday in south Lebanon killed the son of a Hezbollah MP, the Lebanese group confirmed.  The US president, Joe Biden, urged calm  along the Lebanese border and in the West Bank in a call to the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. And in the US, a prestigious Harvard journal has been accused  of censoring an article accusing Israel of genocide in Gaza. How the partial ceasefire deal came about – and the risks of it being undone – are explained in this analysis.                                                                      NSW Coalition and Greens push Labor on emissions target | The state Labor government is being pushed to  legislate an emissions reduction target of 70% by 2035 with the opposition and crossbench working together on amendments. The Minns government is racing to pass its centrepiece climate legislation in the final sitting fortnight of the year to entrench targets of 50% by 2030 and net zero by 2050.                                                                                                           Perth bushfire | Residents in Perth’s northern suburbs were continuing to flee  a fast-moving and out-of-control bushfire. The blaze has so far destroyed 10 homes. An emergency warning has been issued for Wanneroo, Jandabup, Mariginiup, Melaleuca, Sinagra and Tapping.                                                                     Queensland rejects Clive Palmer’s bid to build coal-fired power station | Queensland authorities blocked Palmer’s plans  to build a large coal-fired power station on an outback cattle property, citing climate impacts and rejecting his company’s claims it would be “carbon neutral”.                                                                     MPs condemn payment of millions to consultants | Consultants have been paid to help  design federally funded grant schemes and help in assessing applications to such programs – a task critics say should be done by public servants and not outsourced to private companies.                                                                                                           Far-right party set to win most seats in Dutch elections | Geert Wilders’ far-right, anti-Islam Party for Freedom is on course to win 35 seats in the 150-seat parliament, according to exit polls, in a major electoral upset whose reverberations will be felt around Europe. Read this profile  of the Dutch far-right figurehead.                                                                     Cuba Gooding Jr sued for alleged sexual misconduct | In a complaint filed in a New York state court , plaintiff Jasmine Abbay said the Jerry Maguire star forcibly kissed her without her consent in September 2018, while she was working as a cocktail waitress at the Lavo nightclub in midtown Manhattan. The other plaintiff, Kelsey Harbert, accused Gooding of groping her breast in June 2019 at the Magic Hour rooftop bar, also in midtown. Gooding’s representatives did not immediately respond to requests for comment.                                                           In pictures                   
                     Readers’ best photos                   
A yawning dog in Mumbai, lions in Crete and a world heritage site in Marseille – here are some of the best images  sent by our readers. Click here to submit yours!
                   What they said …                   
***
“I walked out of school today with all of you to take a stand on the right side of history.” – Audra, Year 11 student
Hundreds of students gathered at  Melbourne’s Flinders Street station as part of a strike for Palestine, defying calls from political leaders for them to remain in school.
                   In numbers                   
The cost-of-living crisis is widening the generational divide. 
                   Before bed read                   
Looking to save this Christmas? Here’s 101 gift ideas under $50.
                   Daily word game                   
Today’s starter word is: LEG.  You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. 
                   Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know. Sign up for our Morning Mail newsletter here.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




No 10 accuses FA of ‘equivocating’ on terrorism by opting to stop lighting arch
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 10:58 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FOOTBALL; Version:2
Length: 432 words
Byline: Paul MacInnes
Highlight: FA to continue supporting campaigns and causes in other waysFailure to light Wembley arch in Israel colours was criticised
Body


Downing Street has accused the Football Association of equivocating over terrorism, as it criticised the decision to scale back the use of the Wembley arch for sending messages of solidarity.
The FA decided this week to restrict the occasions on which the arch on the national stadium is illuminated after the controversial decision to acknowledge the Hamas assault on Israel with only a minute’s silence.
Asked about the move on Thursday, the prime minister’s official spokesperson was highly critical. “There should be no room for equivocation when it comes to terrorism,” they said. “It’s right to stand by those affected and we were disappointed that they chose not to light it up in response to the attack in Israel.”
The FA has concluded that Wembley should be illuminated only for sporting and entertainment purposes, after its board reflected on its policy. Speaking last month, the FA’s chief executive, Mark Bullingham, said he “recognised the hurt”  to the Jewish community caused by the decision to leave the arch unlit during England men’s friendly against Australia in the week after the Hamas attack.
FA sources insist that the change in policy will not lead to the organisation stepping back from supporting a range of campaigns and causes, and the possibility of the arch being lit as an act of solidarity has not been ruled out. But there has been a reversal of the approach that meant the arch was lit for a number of causes over recent years.
After the Russian invasion of Ukraine last year the arch was illuminated in the blue and yellow of the Ukrainian flag, and it displayed the colours of the French tricolour after the terror attacks in Paris in 2015. It has also been lit to support International Women’s Day and displayed the rainbow colours of the LGBTQI+ flag last year, after Fifa’s decision to ban England players from wearing rainbow armbands  at the World Cup.
In the week of the 7 October attacks the FA came under pressure to light the arch in the colours of the flag of Israel. It opted instead for a period of silence to honour those who died in the attacks and the Palestinian victims of Israel’s subsequent offensive. At the time, the government’s adviser on antisemitism, John Mann, said the decision showed that “Jews don’t count” and argued that the FA appeared out of its depth. “By saying it wants to avoid politics football has ended up playing politics,” he said.
The FA appears to have acknowledged that criticism in its new policy and by emphasising privately that Wembley is, primarily, a sport and entertainment venue, rather than a national monument.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




First Thing: Dutch election results put Geert Wilders’ far-right party in lead
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 11:39 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1821 words
Byline: Nicola Slawson
Highlight: European far-right leaders celebrate success of Wilders’ Party for Freedom which has won 37 seats. Plus, welcome to the world of gossip surveillance
Body


Happy Thanksgiving!
Far-right figures have congratulated the Dutch anti-Islam, anti-EU populist politician Geert Wilders  and his Party for Freedom (PVV) on being predicted to win the most seats in the Netherlands parliament, in an upset that opens the way for the PVV to play a key role in the formation of the next government.
With nearly all votes counted, preliminary results in the Dutch election show  the Party for Freedom (PVV) took 37 seats, more than any other party and significantly more than expected in opinion polling during the campaign.
A GreenLeft-Labour party alliance (GL/PvdA) led by the former EU commissioner Frans Timmermans finished second with 25 seats. The liberal-conservative Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), led by the outgoing justice minister, Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, got 24 seats.
The French far-right leader Marine Le Pen, whose National Rally party is the biggest single opposition party in the French parliament, congratulated Wilders.
                                                                                        What did Le Pen say? She described Wilders’ Party for Freedom (PVV) as an ally with her party in the European parliament, saying his election performance showed that “more and more countries at the heart of the EU are contesting the way it works... and want us to master immigration, which is seen by many European peoples as massive and totally anarchic today”.                                                                                          What happens now? Much will depend on a coalition-building process.                                                                                Energy companies still investing too much in fossil fuels, global watchdog says                                      
Energy companies are investing twice as much in oil and gas as they should be if the world hopes to limit rising global temperatures to avert a climate catastrophe, according to the International Energy Agency (IEA). 
The world’s energy watchdog said the sector still had “minimal” engagement with the global clean energy transition, and continued to contribute just 1% of clean energy investment globally.
In a special report before the Cop28 climate summit in Dubai, which begins on 30 November, the agency called on the industry to show commitment to tackling pollution by balancing its investments in clean energy and fossil fuels.
The IEA executive director, Fatih Birol, said the industry faced “a moment of truth” in which it must “make profound decisions” about its role.
                                                                                        What else did Birol say? “With the world suffering the impacts of a worsening climate crisis, continuing with business as usual is neither socially nor environmentally responsible,” he said.                                                                                Israel-Hamas ceasefire and hostage deal won’t happen before Friday, Israeli and US officials say                                      
A four-day truce in Gaza and the release of some hostages will not start until tomorrow at the earliest, Israeli official have said , delaying by at least 24 hours the proposed exchange of hostages held by Hamas in the territory for Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli jails.
The exchange of female and minor hostages and prisoners was due to take place following the start of the first ceasefire in seven weeks of war in Gaza, officials from both Hamas and Israel have said.
The truce, which would initially last for four days, was announced early on Wednesday after days of speculation and raised hopes for a more durable pause in the violence.
More than 100 Palestinians were reported killed within hours of the announcement as Israeli forces continued attacking Gaza from the land, sea and air. After a pause from late afternoon on Wednesday, rockets were fired into Israel from Gaza at 5am this morning.
                                                                                        Is the deal still on track? Tzachi Hanegbi, the Israeli national security adviser, said shortly after midnight on Thursday the agreement remained on track. “The contacts on the release of our hostages are advancing and continuing constantly,” he said in a statement.                                                                                In other news …                                                                                                           A speeding car crashed in flames on the bridge linking New York state and Ontario at Niagara Falls yesterday, killing two people in the vehicle  and sparking a security scare that closed four US-Canadian border crossings.  Kathy Hochul, the governor of New York, said there was “no indication of a terrorist attack”.                                                                                          A jury has found the former head of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police intelligence unit guilty of leaking state secrets , the first time a Canadian has been convicted under the country’s Security of Information Act.  Cameron Ortis was found guilty of three counts of violating the act and one count of attempting to do so.                                                                                          North Korea has                         said it will deploy new weapons and stronger armed forces along its heavily armed border with South Korea.  In a sign of rising tensions, North Korea said it would restore “all military measures”  it had halted under a 2018 confidence-building agreement with South Korea.                                                                                          Cuba Gooding Jr was sued yesterday by two women  whose sexual assault cases against the Oscar-winning actor underl                         ie a criminal prosecution that ended with him pleading guilty but serving no jail time.  Lawyers for Gooding did not immediately respond to requests for comment.                                                                                          Ukraine has not reached a stalemate in its war with Russia because the west can help Kyiv by “dropping five more queens on the board”, according to an influential historian of eastern Europe.   Timothy Snyder, a Yale professor, argued that continuing high levels of military aid could allow Ukraine to prevail.                                                                                Don’t miss this: ‘Our little uniter’ – New Jersey town bereft by capture of beloved wild turkey                                      
Residents of West Orange, New Jersey, have been left heartbroken after a wild turkey named “Turkules”, whose resilient nature and ability to evade capture “brought the town together”, was finally snared by state officials.  Turkules, who was named by a local man, first took up residence in West Orange, 25 miles west of New York City, over the summer. The bird’s fearless attitude towards traffic and disregard for authority soon made him a local celebrity. Despite sometimes causing mile-long traffic jams, his popularity was such that on Saturday businesses organized a “Hometown Hero” event in Turkules’s honor. But after a weeks-long effort, Turkules has now been captured and relocated to Wharton state forest, 85 miles away, leaving the town bereft.
                                        Or this: ‘It’s not a public service, it’s toxic’ – welcome to the world of gossip surveillance                                      
TikTokers are sharing strangers’ conversations, hoping to expose gossipers to the very people they’re talking about. The videos – in which uploaders eavesdrop on strangers and report the “tea” to their TikTok audiences, sometimes offering identifying features of all those involved – have become a curious trend on the app. Dozens of these videos are popping up under various hashtags, airing out the dirty laundry of unsuspecting parties: baby daddies with secret families, fiances who cheated while on their bachelor trips, and friend groups complaining behind the back of an unwitting member. Is the humiliation worth it?
                                        Climate check: Ban private jets to address climate crisis, says Thomas Piketty                                      
Questions of social and economic class must be at the centre of the world’s response to the climate crisis, to address the huge inequalities between the carbon footprints of the rich and poor and prevent a backlash against climate policies, the economist Thomas Piketty has said. Regulations will be needed to outlaw goods and services that have unnecessarily high greenhouse gas emissions, such as private jets, outsized vehicles, and flights over short distances, he said in an interview with the Guardian.  Rich countries must also put in place progressive carbon taxes that take into account people’s incomes, as current policies usually fail to adjust for people’s real needs.
                                        Help us raise $1.5m to fund independent journalism in 2024                                      
As we head into 2024, the Guardian’s journalists are already hard at work preparing for one of the most consequential news cycles of our lifetimes. We need your support to raise $1.5m to fund our reporting into areas such as: the 2024 election and the potential for another Trump presidency; the ongoing war in the Middle East; the sweeping implications of artificial intelligence; the climate crisis; and investigations into high-stakes abuses of power. If you value our reporting, please make a year-end gift today.  We’re depending on you.
                                        Last Thing: Missouri library will ban porn star book – after 20 people on waiting list read it                                      
A Missouri library system will ban a book that critics are calling too sexually explicit – but they are allowing the 20 people on the book’s waiting list to read it first. A committee with the St Charles city-county library system in eastern Missouri has moved to ban the book Bang Like a Porn Star: Sex Tips from the Pros, but will allow everyone on the book’s waiting list before 21 November to read it first , the St Louis Post-Dispatch reported. Jason Kuhl, CEO of the St Charles city-county library, said the book was purchased five years ago because “it was the only item readily available at the time about sexuality and sexual health for gay men”.
                                        Sign up                                      
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. 
                                        Get in touch                                      
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




FA council member resigns after ‘Hitler proud of Netanyahu’ post
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 2:24 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FOOTBALL; Version:2
Length: 480 words
Byline: Jacob Steinberg
Highlight: Wasim Haq steps down from role amid FA investigationHaq says decision is ‘best course of action for the FA and myself’
Body


Wasim Haq has resigned as a member of the Football Association council after saying “Adolf Hitler would be proud of Benjamin Netanyahu”. Haq, who was suspended  after a post on social media about Israel’s war with Hamas led him to be accused of antisemitism this month, said that his decision to step down was “the best course of action for the FA and myself” and reiterated that his comments were not aimed at the Jewish community.
The resignation has come before the conclusion of an investigation into the post. Haq, who joined the FA as a BAME Football Communities representative in 2019, had already been sacked by the Lawn Tennis Association as an independent councillor. He is being investigated by England Golf, where he holds a role similar to that at the FA.
The controversy was sparked by Haq, who had previously left a position on the FA’s Inclusion Advisory Board, posting on X: “Netanyahu has sacrificed his own people to maintain power…whilst #Palestinians are trying to maintain their sanity. Adolf Hitler would be proud of Benjamin Netanyahu.”
The FA initially said that Haq had deleted the post and apologised for causing offence. But Lord Wolfson, who chairs the FA’s Football Regulatory Committee, called for a stronger response. English football’s governing body soon launched an investigation and called the post “unacceptable” and “highly offensive”.
Haq was suspended two days later, with the FA saying his future depended on the outcome of an investigation. Haq wrote to the FA’s chair, Debbie Hewitt, on Thursday to offer his resignation.
“It is with great sadness that I inform you of my decision to resign as a member of The FA Council with immediate effect,” Haq wrote. “I have determined this is the best course of action for the Football Association and myself.
“As someone who has worked closely with many Jewish people over the years and created meaningful and valued friendships, the most painful part of this process is knowing that some of those friends and colleagues may not forgive me for the misunderstanding and hurt I have unintentionally caused. I take full responsibility and reiterate my apology to them and all those affected.
“My comment was a direct criticism of a politician, not about a race or a religious group. In expressing those feelings, I chose the wrong words entirely and that has impacted the leadership position that I hold at the FA.”
Haq added that he would be meeting members of the Jewish community to “share and understand”. He offered to help the FA set up a “systematic process in which we can bring communities together in the future”.
The FA faced criticism after refusing to light the Wembley arch in the colours of the Israeli flag after the attack by Hamas on 7 October. It has since decided that the arch will no longer be lit  for social causes and to show solidarity after terrorist attacks and natural disasters.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Adviser warns UK government against tightening laws on glorifying terrorism
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 12:01 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 590 words
Byline: Daniel Boffey Chief reporter
Highlight: Independent reviewer says change could harm freedom of speech and further strain overtaxed security services
Body


No 10 should not implement plans to amend the law on glorifying terrorism after the pro-Palestine marches as it would do “no favours” to police, MI5 or the probation service, a government adviser has said.
In a 15-page report submitted to the Home Office, Jonathan Hall KC, the government’s independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, said there was no need to respond to the marches with new terrorism legislation, adding that there was “good reason for caution” given both the risk of unintended consequences and the drain on limited state resources.
Ministers have said they want to tighten the law on glorifying terrorism after the conduct of a minority of people on the pro-Palestine demonstrations in recent weeks, including the chanting of the controversial slogan  “From the river to the sea, Palestine will be free”, prompted calls for change. Some view the words as antisemitic and as encouraging the destruction of Israel.
In his advice to the home secretary, James Cleverly, Hall wrote that changes to terrorism legislation would not be the right course given the utmost seriousness of the crimes they cover, the need for precision in the law and the risk of inflicting “excessive damage” on the right to free speech.
He said: “My overall conclusion is that there is no need to legislate for any amendments to terrorism legislation now, and good reason for caution.
“It is difficult to identify any real situations where a gap in terrorism legislation means that terrorist mischief cannot currently be addressed by arrest and prosecution.
“Given the number of pro-Palestine marchers, there have been plenty of opportunities for gaps to become apparent. There may well be other mischiefs (such as antisemitism), but those are not a subject for terrorism legislation.
“There is a general risk of legislating in response to one set of protests because of the risk of unintended consequences when new legislation comes to be applied to other protests.”
Hall added that to “extend the poll of terrorist offences unnecessarily” would impose further burdens on the already stretched security services.
“Either the investigative authorities dramatically shift their resources or ignore new terrorist offences,” he warned. “If individuals are convicted and sentenced to terms of imprisonment, this has major resource implications for their management in prison and on release.”
The glorifying of terrorism is already a criminal offence, but only if people could reasonably infer that there is an encouragement to emulate the conduct. Hall warned that broadening the offence should be immediately ruled out.
He wrote: “The terrorism definition applies just as well to the anti-apartheid actions of Nelson Mandela and the revolutionary battles of Scotland’s William Wallace as to the terrorist attacks on 7 October 2023. There are plenty of other examples. A general solution of prohibiting all reference to terrorists or terrorist acts at public marches can therefore be rejected at the outset.”
Hall said it was already an offence to belong to a proscribed organisation, wear an article linked to it, to deliberately invite support for it or recklessly encourage support for it, and that the laws had been precisely written to target those who pose a real danger to the public.
He wrote: “Especially on political matters or questions of public interest, members of the public should not be daunted from exercising their freedom of expression and right of lawful assembly based on laws which are vague or which they cannot be expected to understand.”

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Gaza truce due to begin, call for childcare boost, King’s secret ‘vacant goods’ profit
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 7:53 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1396 words
Byline: Martin Farrer
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Morning Mail here, and finish your day with our Afternoon Update newsletter
Body


Morning everyone. The long-awaited ceasefire in the Israel-Hamas war is due to begin later today and the first group of hostages should be released under the truce deal later tonight. At home, the Productivity Commission has answered the government’s request to design an affordable, accessible, high-quality, universal early education system. That’s our top Australian story but we’re also looking at how King Charles is using an ancient Latin concept known as bona vacantia  to profit from the assets of dead citizens, the OpenAI program that staff feared could “threaten humanity”, and Australia lose a sensational T20 against India.
                   Australia                                                                   Perth fires | Firefighters continued overnight to fight out-of-control bushfires  that have claimed at least 10 homes in metropolitan Perth. Emergency chiefs say they could last for days amid near-40C temperatures and strong winds.                                                                     Childcare blueprint | The Productivity Commission’s report into childcare says  families should get three days a week guaranteed, and those earning less than $80,000 should be given a universal 90% subsidy rate.                                                                     Report ‘censored’ | The government’s auditing watchdog allegedly  censored a major study that was critical of the big four consultancy firms because their partners sat on its board, according to the academic who wrote the report.                                                                     Detention imbroglio | The home affairs minister, Clare O’Neil, says that the controversial indefinite detainee NZYQ could have been deported – but almost all of the facts suggest otherwise. So what’s going on?  An illegal boat arrival in Western Australia will only increase Labor’s discomfort  with the issue …                                                                     ABC controversy | Three West Australian environmental activists say  footage provided by the ABC to state police under a “compulsory legal process” has likely resulted in them being charged with criminal offences.                                                           World                                                                   Exclusive | King Charles is profiting from the deaths of thousands of people  in the north-west of England whose assets are secretly being used to upgrade his hereditary estate, the Guardian can reveal. The custom revolves around a Latin term, bona vacantia,  which means “vacant goods”.                                                                      Ceasefire set | Israel’s army has arrested  the director of Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital and bombed at least 300 targets from the air as an agreed four-day truce was delayed until  7am local time today (4pm AEDT). The first hostages, a group of 13, will be released nine hours later, the Qatari foreign ministry announced overnight. Actor Melissa Barrera says  she has been dropped from Scream VII because of her tweets in support of the Palestinians.                                                                     Dutch shock | Tax, healthcare and immigration were the three big issues  that helped Geert Wilders’ far-right party score a shock win in the Dutch election. Muslims in the country have expressed fear for their future  if the avowedly anti-immigrant Wilders manages to form a government.                                                                     AI alarm | OpenAI was reportedly working on an advanced system before Sam Altman’s sacking that was so powerful they believed it could threaten humanity.                                                                      Foxx accused | Hollywood star Jamie Foxx has been accused of sexual assault  while at a New York rooftop bar eight years ago. A representative for Foxx has been contacted for comment. And the city’s mayor, Eric Adams, has also been accused  of historic assault dating back to 1993, a claim he vigorously denies.                                                           Full Story                   
                     Newsroom edition: how inequality exacerbates the climate crisis                   
A new report from Oxfam shows that rising inequality is not only worsening the climate crisis, the climate crisis is also worsening inequality. Editor-in-chief Lenore Taylor and head of newsroom Mike Ticher discuss the growing carbon divide. 
                   In-depth                   
The cost has doubled from $10bn to $20bn since tunnelling began and there’s been untold disruption, noise and mess. But now that drivers can travel from the Blue Mountains on Sydney’s western fringes to the Harbour Bridge without passing through a traffic light, is the completion of Westconnex – with the world’s biggest underground motorway interchange at Rozelle – really going to reduce congestion?
                   Not the news                   
Christos Tsiolkas’s new book, The In-Between, concerns the relationship of two men, Perry and Ivan, as they navigate middle age. Our reviewer, Beejay Silcox, writes that it has many classic Tsiolkas moments, a “monstrously awkward and gloriously well-observed” dinner party and “ferocious and relentless” sex. But it is also a “humble book... Perhaps his best”. 
                   The world of sport                                                                   Cricket | Australia lost an incredible first T20 against India despite a first century in the format from Josh Inglis (pictured) as the hosts reached the target of 209 off the last ball  in Visakhapatnam.                                                                     AFLW | After their 41-point domination of the Demons, North Melbourne’s women are on the rise and will reach their first grand final if they can beat Adelaide on Sunday.                                                                      Premier League | The English top flight appears more divided than ever  after the clubs failed to agree on a ban on loans between multi-owned teams.                                                           Media roundup                   
A “class war”  has erupted over plans to reduce Moore Park golf course by half with the club rejecting accusations that it is just used by rich interlopers, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. Peter Dutton and John Pesutto are on a collision course over the candidate to replace David Van as federal senator with the national Liberal leader favouring a man the state leader “can’t abide” , according to the Age. Gina Rinehart has backed a plan by the mayors of Perth and the Gold Coast to host a “coast-to-coast” 2026 Commonwealth Games , the Australian reports. Brisbane’s homeless people say the council is sending round a “hit man”  to take their belongings, the Courier Mail says.
                   What’s happening today                                                                   Sydney | Hearing for US extradition case against former pilot Daniel Duggan who worked in China.                                                                     Melbourne | Girl, 12, charged with murder over the Footscray stabbing appears at children’s court.                                                                     Victoria | Public hearings for the inquiry into historical child sexual abuse at government schools.                                                           Sign up                   
Enjoying the Morning Mail? Then you’ll love our Afternoon Update newsletter. Sign up here  to finish your day with a three-minute snapshot of the day’s main news, and complete your daily news roundup.
                   Brain teaser                   
And finally, here are the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow. 
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword                                                                                   Contact us                   
If you have a story tip  or  technical issue  viewing this newsletter, please reply to this email.
If you are a Guardian supporter and need assistance with regards to contributions and/or digital subscriptions, please email customer.help@guardian.co.uk

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Australia news live: O’Neil accuses Dutton of politicising national security on visas for Israel-Palestine conflict
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 7:24 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:21
Length: 9406 words
Byline: Natasha May (now) and Elias Visontay, Rafqa Touma and Mostafa Rachwani (earlier)
Highlight: ‘National security is the first priority of our government,’ home affairs minister says. Follow the day’s news liveGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
The Gabba will be demolished in 2025 ahead of a rebuild that will see it become the centrepiece of the Brisbane 2032 Olympics as part of a $2.7 billion project.
Queensland’s deputy premier, Steven Miles, on Friday unveiled the state’s vision for the surrounding precinct, which could be rebranded East Bank, after accepting a project validation report for the iconic stadium.
Demolition work is set to start after the Ashes Test in 2025, 130 years after the Brisbane sporting venue was first established.
Three new pedestrian bridges will be constructed over adjoining roads as part of Queensland’s biggest urban renewal since 1988’s Expo, with retail, dining, housing and open space to also feature.
Read more:
 Related:  Brisbane’s Gabba to be demolished after 2025 Ashes and rebuilt as part of ‘East Bank’ precinct
block-time published-time 6.13am GMT 
 Ex-Labor MP sentenced to further 20 years for sexually abusing minors and supplying drugs 
Ex-NSW Labor politician Milton Orkopoulos used drugs, money and his position of trust in the community to sexually assault vulnerable young boys.
The now-66-year-old will spend another decade behind bars after being found guilty in April on 26 charges involving sexually abusing and supplying drugs to four minors between 1993 and 2003.
He was sentenced on Friday to a further 20 years in jail for the offences, which include 11 counts of sexual intercourse with a person aged under 16.
Orkopoulos sexually touched the boys, then aged between 10 and 13, and forced them to have anal and oral sex with him, leaving them ashamed, fearful and suffering lifelong psychological impacts.
He is already serving a near 14-year sentence for a string of other sex crimes against young boys, for which he was convicted in 2008. He continues to deny any guilt.
Read more:
 Related:  Ex-NSW Labor MP who lured boys for sex with drugs and money sentenced to further 20 years in prison
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.23am GMT
block-time published-time 6.00am GMT 
The Australian Financial Complaints Authority (Afca) has welcomed today’s announcement of a scams prevention accord by Australian banks.
Afca’s chief executive officer and chief ombudsman, David Locke, said:
                       We have been calling for stronger action and for a consistent approach across the banking sector to prevent scams, and we welcome these positive steps announced today.                     
                       When we talk about scams, we are really talking about serious organised crime, often conducted by international syndicates using sophisticated methods of deception and fraud.                     
                       We are all being required to use digital banking, so the banks must ensure that their products and services are safe and that consumers are protected. Anyone can fall victim to these scams.                     
Afca is receiving about 1,000 scam cases a month, with 6,048 across the 2022–23 financial year, a 46% increase on the previous year.
In the first quarter of the new 2023–24 financial year, it received 2,856 scam-related complaints, up 57% from 1,819 in the previous three months and 125% higher than the same period a year earlier. The sums lost in these cases can exceed $1 million.
Other initiatives such as greater sharing of real-time intelligence, delays and friction in the banking system to frustrate fraud and restrictions on high-risk transfers, are also welcome, he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.04am GMT
block-time published-time 5.38am GMT 
 ‘Blank cheque’, a licence to print money, or somewhere in between? 
Energy ministers are currently meeting in Perth, with the expanded capacity investment scheme  high on the agenda (along with perhaps 17 other items).
We discussed some of the outstanding issues of Chris Bowen ’s grand new plan to set auctions up to drive 32 gigawatts of new solar, wind and storage projects into the grid here:
 Related:  Chris Bowen’s plan is a shot in the arm for clean energy – but a lot has to go right to avoid future blackouts
Just how state-owned entities (including Snowy Hydro ) will work with or against private firms remains to be seen, as will be the carrots the federal government can lay out to get states like New South Wales to clear planning delays.
Certain media outlets said taxpayers could be up for billions of dollars, while opposition spokesperson Ted O’Brien said Bowen had written a “blank cheque” on the taxpayers’ behalf.
To be fair, the cost is still to be determined, so it is “blank” in that sense. However, the way tenders will work – including setting a ceiling and a floor price – could turn the scheme into an earner for the government.
The ACT pioneered so-called reverse auctions in Australia. The present average price is $86.52 a megawatt-hour, with the average to fall to $81.58/MWh when the Goyder windfarm begins operations in April 2024, the government told Guardian Australia.
During periods of relatively low wholesale power prices, the ACT forks out money. When prices exceed a certain point, they receive revenue.
The latter is the present condition, with the ACT to distribute $68.5m to consumers this fiscal year. A typical household consuming 6,500 kilowatt-hours a year will get a (pre-GST) rebate of about $148. A business customer consuming 25,000 kWh a year can expect a rebate of about $570 (excluding GST).
So, it all hinges on the tender price and the range of the “collar” between the floor and the ceiling.
Developers, though, enjoy more certainty and hence, can raise funds more cheaply and bid at lower prices. (And future governments can’t rip up the deals either.)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.47am GMT
block-time published-time 5.12am GMT 
 Home affairs minister says Peter Dutton using national security ‘for his own political ends’  
The home affairs minister, Clare O’Neil, has accused Peter Dutton of politicising national security issues including the granting of visas for people in the Israel–Palestine conflict and the apparent arrival of a boat in remote Western Australia,  with 12 people in Australian Border Force custody at Truscott airbase.
O’Neil said:
National security is the first priority of our government. As security agencies have repeatedly warned, inflammatory language has a direct link to increased risk of violence. Everyone in our parliament needs to consider the impact that their language will have.
Our government is careful and deliberate about how we discuss national security issues and especially operational matters. No political objective should ever come before the security of our country and the integrity of the operations and agencies that protect us every day.
Whether it’s the conflict in the Middle East, tensions at home, Operation Sovereign Borders or even the highly sensitive security operations involved in individuals returning from conflict, there’s nothing Peter Dutton won’t use for his own political ends.
Peter Dutton is a reckless politician who will do and say anything to score political points – even if it puts the national security of Australians at risk.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.22am GMT
block-time published-time 4.48am GMT 
 Virgin Australia to increase Boeing 737 Max 8 fleet 
 Virgin Australia has ordered an extra six Boeing 737 Max 8 aircraft, on top of eight it was already due to receive, as the airline continues to anchor its growth on fuel efficient fleet.
Virgin made the announcement as it took delivery of its third Max 8 in Brisbane on Friday, with the remaining 11 on order expected next year. Delivery will be staggered at approximately one aircraft per month in 2024.
The new Max 8s will enter domestic and the few short-haul international routes that Virgin has resumed – including Fiji, Bali and Samoa – since its pandemic-induced restructure.
Virgin said the Max 8s will reduce emissions by at least 15% per flight compared to older generation 737s, and will help the airline achieve its 2030 ambition of reducing carbon emissions intensity by 22% and its commitment to targeting net zero emissions by 2050.
The Max 8, which is also significantly quieter than existing 737s, has been the subject of repeated controversies. Manufacturer Boeing is still recovering from the biggest crisis in its history after two deadly crashes forced the grounding of its entire 737 Max fleet.
The crashes were caused by faulty sensors and design flaws, which aviation regulators are now satisfied have been rectified and the aircraft are safe to fly.
 Alistair Hartley, Virgin Australia chief strategy and transformation officer, said: “We are investing in our fleet to best meet our customers’ needs while positioning the business for success in the long-term. A more modern, sustainable, and streamlined fleet is central to our ongoing transformation.”
The investment in a fuel efficient fleet comes ahead of an expectation that private owners Bain Capital will attempt Virgin’s initial public offering – to relist it on the stock exchange – in 2024.
    Virgin Australia said a ‘more modern, sustainable, and streamlined fleet’ is central to their transformation. Photograph: Rick Rycroft/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.05am GMT
block-time published-time 4.18am GMT 
 Most disabled women reluctant to report domestic violence to police, report says 
Women living with disabilities are almost twice as likely to experience domestic violence than those without, but most will not seek help.
A report  from People with Disability Australia found 57% of women with disabilities had avoided reaching out for support because of negative past experiences when they had their concerns dismissed, faced discrimination or experienced further harm.
Every single woman interviewed did not trust services and authorities, and 71% said they would avoid reporting incidents of family or domestic violence to police in the future.
One interviewee recalled her mother’s experience with family violence, as a woman with a disability.
“My mum actually ended up being institutionalised in a psychiatric institution – she couldn’t access the help that she needed,” she said.
“So that taught me as a young person – what’s the point in reaching out?”
Many respondents said they were scared their children would be taken away if they sought support, such as one woman who uses a wheelchair.
Living with a disability can also be very expensive, so many women who experience financial abuse also avoid seeking help because they do not believe they can support themselves.
– AAP
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.24am GMT
block-time published-time 4.17am GMT 
Thanks to my colleague Rafqa for bringing us through this afternoon’s news so far.
You now have Elias Visontay to take you through the news from here.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.39am GMT
block-time published-time 3.52am GMT 
 Chalmers acknowledges changes to infrastructure funding 'contentious'  
Over in Brisbane, treasurer Jim Chalmers is appearing at the Future Brisbane summit, where he has acknowledged the federal government’s recent changes to priorities in its $120bn infrastructure pipeline are “contentious”.
Earlier this month, infrastructure minister Catherine King announced 50 high-risk infrastructure projects across the country  would be defunded with the projected $7bn in savings put toward other “nation-building” projects.
State premiers have strongly criticised the announcement and are expected to raise the issues at the national cabinet meeting in early December.
Chalmers on Friday said it was “contentious” but flagged there’ll be new announcements in the future, depending on what the government “can afford to build”.
Our job is to manage the budget in the most responsible way, to build the best infrastructure we can – as quick as we can. Part of that means being upfront with people about what’s possible.
     Jim Chalmers flagged new infrastructure announcements based on what the government “can afford to build”. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.56am GMT
block-time published-time 3.36am GMT 
 Prisoner still on run in north Queensland after two escapees found  
A prisoner is still on the run in north Queensland but police have been able to locate two escapees, days after they left a Townsville prison.
Authorities had been searching for Trent Darby Ryan, Daimien Gary Richard Izzard and Dallas Wayne Quakawoot since Wednesday after they could not be located at the low-security Townsville Correctional Centre.
Police said Ryan, 34, and Quakawoot, 22, were located by a dog squad at 2.30am on Friday after the pair abandoned a stolen car in Townsville suburb Railway Estate, about 10km away from the prison.
They were arrested without incident and are back in custody, police said.
They have been charged with escape lawful custody and other property related offences.
The two men are set to appear in Townsville magistrates court on Friday.
However, Izzard, 28, remains at large.
Queensland Correctional Services said Ryan was serving one year and three months for assault occasioning bodily harm while Quakawoot had received four years and three months for armed robbery.
Izzard is serving two and a half years for driving under the influence of alcohol or other substances.
The trio’s escape marked the second in a month at the north Queensland correctional facility after two men fled in late October.
They were arrested and returned to custody within two days.
– Australian Associated Press
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.58am GMT
block-time published-time 3.28am GMT 
 Families earning $80k or less could get free childcare 
Low-income families could receive free childcare if the federal government accepts the key recommendations of a major report.
The Productivity Commission has been tasked with charting a course towards universal early childhood education and care.
In a set of draft recommendations , it has urged the government to modify childcare subsidies and increase access for children from all backgrounds.
Families would be able to access up to three days of subsidised care a week, regardless of how many hours they worked.
Households with an annual income of $80,000 or less would be eligible for a 100% subsidy.
The changes would cost about $2.5bn a year.
The commission also recommended measures to expand the childcare workforce.
- Australian Associated Press
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.37am GMT
block-time published-time 3.20am GMT 
Another look at the Sydney school students’ strike to rally for Palestine.
    Students walk out of school to demand an end to what they describe as “a genocide being committed in Gaza”. Photograph: Richard Milnes/Shutterstock      People attend a rally during a High Schoolers For Palestine demonstration. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23am GMT
block-time published-time 3.11am GMT 
 Sydney students rally in support of Palestine  
Here are some images coming out of the Sydney school students’ strike to rally in support of Palestine at Town Hall.
    People attend a rally during a High Schoolers For Palestine demonstration in Sydney, Friday 24 November, 2023. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP      People attend a rally during a High Schoolers For Palestine demonstration in Sydney. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP      A man with an Israeli flag is spoken to by police as he attends a rally during a High Schoolers For Palestine demonstration in Sydney. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.52am GMT
block-time published-time 3.00am GMT 
 Mostafa Rachwani will be bringing us updates from school students’ strike to rally for Palestine at Sydney’s Town Hall today.
Students are “proudly declaring they’ve been ‘marked absent today’ to attend”.
enltrAt the school strike rally in Town Hall, students proudly declaring they’ve been “marked absent today” to attend the protest pic.twitter.com/a35zgQlICX
 — Mostafa Rachwani (@Rachwani91) November 24, 2023
enltrStudents are chanting in support of Palestine, defying state and federal politicians to attend pic.twitter.com/bA7OIihlGb
 — Mostafa Rachwani (@Rachwani91) November 24, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.19am GMT
block-time published-time 2.48am GMT 
 Bruce Lehrmann denies he was trying to get Brittany Higgins drunk in Canberra pub  
 Bruce Lehrmann has apologised for telling the federal court he did not buy Brittany Higgins any drinks after CCTV footage was played showing him handing over a card to buy her two drinks, but he has denied trying to get her drunk.
The former Liberal staffer was asked by Ten’s barrister Matt Collins KC if he was trying to get Higgins drunk after footage of her was played to the court showing she had consumed six spirit-based drinks in a Canberra pub.
Lehrmann could not explain to the court why there is no record of a third credit card he used to buy those drinks. He maintains he only had two cards, but couldn’t reconcile the amount the drinks would have cost compared to what was on his card statements that he gave to the AFP.
Collins asked Lehrmann: “Do you agree that we’ve just seen you and Ms Higgins returning to the courtyard area from the bar area, each of you carrying a spirits-based drink with a vodkas?”
Lehrmann replied: “I can’t recall what type of [drink]” and he said he paid for them with a card “but I can’t explain beyond that”.
Lehrmann denied telling Higgins to “drink that all now” in a clip which showed him pointing to the glass of alcohol on the table.
Collins suggested he told Higgins to finish her drink before they left.
Lehrmann rejected the suggestion by Collins that he had amassed three drinks in front of Higgins and said “all hers, all hers”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.50am GMT
block-time published-time 2.47am GMT 
 Gabba to be demolished in 2025 
The Queensland government has announced it’s considering renaming a large chunk of the suburb of Woolloongabba as part of plans for an upgrade of the Gabba cricket ground.
Deputy premier and planning minister Stephen Miles announced on Friday the stadium will be knocked down in 2025, as part of a controversial plan for a new venue for the Olympics.
The new stadium will be at the centre of a revitalised residential and commercial precinct, which will include 880 new apartments, three new pedestrian bridges, and expanded retail and dining options.
Miles also raised the idea of renaming the area “East Bank”, similar to South Bank, an inner-city recreational area on the Brisbane River that was converted from an industrial site.
This isn’t just about a stadium upgrade. This is about anchoring an urban renewal project that will see Woolloongabba transformed like South Bank was transformed for Expo 88.
Woolloongabba is an Aboriginal word which translates  to “fight talk place”. The urban renewal precinct covers much of Woolloongabba, according to Miles. The Gabba stadium is named after the suburb.
The new Gabba stadium will have better sightlines for spectators, larger concourses, improved change rooms and 50,000 seats, up from 36,000.
    Reference Design Report for an upgrade of the Gabba cricket ground in QLD, Australia Photograph: QLD government   
“The Woolloongabba redevelopment, along with Cross River Rail and the Brisbane Metro, will anchor a major redevelopment of Woolloongabba to maximise the benefit of public investment and deliver more housing including social and affordable housing, more jobs, and better connectivity,” he says.
We’re going for the best bang-for-buck and giving Queenslanders a new, modern stadium with all the finishes, because it is the best value for money, and it will deliver much more than a stadium.
Community consultation on the priority development area opens today. Design and procurement of the Gabba rebuild will take place next year.
Miles says construction on the new Gabba will finish by 2030, well ahead of the 2032 games.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.12am GMT
block-time published-time 2.29am GMT 
 Woman accused of love triangle murder plot to be extradited 
A former academic accused of being at the centre of an alleged murder plot that left her ex-partner a tetraplegic and her lover with a gunshot wound will be extradited to South Australia.
 Lisa Margaret Lines did not appear in a Brisbane court on Friday when a magistrate agreed to an unopposed extradition application.
The 43-year-old was represented by a duty lawyer who agreed the extradition was by consent, with Lines accepting she is the person on an arrest warrant.
    Former academic Lisa Lines is being extradited from Brisbane to Adelaide, charged with the attempted murder. Photograph: Capstone Editing   
The court heard Lines has no criminal history in Queensland.
The application was to transfer her to South Australia for a court appearance on Monday.
Lines was taken into custody at Brisbane Airport by Queensland homicide detectives on Thursday on her arrival in Australia.
The historian – a respected expert on the Spanish Civil War – was arrested on the island nation of Palau earlier this month.
Documents before Brisbane magistrates court list her address as Xinidian District, New Taipei City, Taiwan, occupation as editor and place of birth as Woodville, South Australia.
The arrest relates to a convoluted series of events that began with a violent incident in the Adelaide Hills in October 2017.
She is charged with two counts of attempted murder and two counts of conspiracy to murder.
- Australian Associated Press reports
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.20am GMT
block-time published-time 2.15am GMT 
 ABC House Committee concerned trust between journalists and sources 'jeopardised' after WA activists charged  
The ABC House Committee is concerned trust between ABC journalists and their sources may be “jeopardised”, after reports that footage handed to the police by the national broadcaster “may have helped lay charges” against activists who featured in a Four Corners story.
The statement comes after Disrupt Burrup activists were charged yesterday in relation to a planned protest  outside the Perth home of Woodside chief executive Meg O’Neill. 
The ABC MEAA House Committee is concerned about reports that ABC footage handed to the police may have helped lay charges against three activists who featured in a Four Corners story. This is the risk media organisations face when handing over raw footage to police. We are concerned this may jeopardise future relationships and trust between ABC journalists and their sources. The ABC MEAA House Committee is also very concerned about the far-reaching laws in WA that undermine journalists’ ability to make necessary promises to people with whom they work.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.19am GMT
block-time published-time 2.05am GMT 
 Equality advocates divided about delay of NSW ban of ‘gay conversion practices’ 
A decision to delay the introduction of a NSW ban on so-called gay conversion practices has received mixed responses from equality advocates, AAP reports.
The NSW government had promised to introduce laws to outlaw conversion practices by the end of the year.
    Equality advocates marched in Sydney in February for a ban on so-called gay conversion therapy. Photograph: Richard Milnes/REX/Shutterstock   
But following requests to conduct further consultation with survivors, the government will delay the introduction of a proposed bill until early 2024.
Independent MP Alex Greenwich wrote to the premier, Chris Minns, seeking more time for consultation before the laws were introduced.
“Reform is urgent but needs to be done carefully,” he says.
Any legislation will need the review and support of survivors of these harmful practices. I’m working well with the Minns government on this legislation and other long overdue LGBTQI reforms in my equality bill and it’s my hope and intention we will achieve significant progress early in 2024.
But Equality Australia says it is disappointed by the government’s delay.
“The NSW government must deliver legislation that prevents the psychological damage and trauma that conversion practices cause, in whichever settings they occur,” legal director Ghassan Kassisieh said on Friday.
Minns says his government intends to fulfil the commitment to ban LGBTQ+ conversion practices.
It’s clear though that we need more time and more consultation and I want to get this right.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.17am GMT
block-time published-time 1.54am GMT 
Thank you to Mostafa Rachwani for rolling today’s live blog. 
I’ll be with you for the next few hours. If there is anything you don’t want us to miss, shoot it my way @At_Raf_
block-time published-time 1.50am GMT 
 ABC makes statement about discontinuation of defamation case brought by Lehrmann 
The ABC has published a statement  about the discontinuation of the defamation case brought by Bruce Lehrmann against the public broadcaster, saying the ABC notes that a criminal charge of sexual assault against him was dropped.
“On 9 February 2022, the ABC published a National Press Club of Australia address by Brittany Higgins and Grace Tame,” a statement on its website published on Friday said.
Bruce Lehrmann commenced defamation proceedings against the ABC, claiming that the broadcast of the National Press Club of Australia address accused him of sexually assaulting Brittany Higgins. These proceedings were settled on terms satisfactory to Mr Lehrmann and the ABC including discontinuance of the proceedings. The ABC notes that a criminal charge of sexual assault brought against Mr Lehrmann in the ACT was later dropped. The ABC does not suggest that he was guilty of that charge.
The ABC’s case was discontinued out of court on Wednesday before the trial began.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.18am GMT
block-time published-time 1.45am GMT 
 Queensland gives Star Entertainment a licence suspension reprieve 
The Queensland government has given Star Entertainment a reprieve for a licence ban after the firm was found unfit to hold the licences for its casinos in Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
The company was found to have deliberately misled the regulator and failed to adhere to anti-money laundering rules last year.
It was was fined $100m and given until 1 December, 2023 to develop a remediation strategy, or else have both licences suspended for 90 days.
On Friday, attorney general Yvette D’Ath extended the deadline until 31 May, 2024. She says a $200m plan developed by Star had been approved.
“Assessment of progress will inform future decisions about applying the suspensions,” a Queensland government statement says. A 12-month extension has also been given to special manager Nicholas Weeks, who was installed to oversee the operations overhaul at the Gold Coast and Brisbane casinos. Mr Weeks, manager assisting Terri Hamilton and their team will monitor the plan’s implementation while Star “proves its commitment and ability to remediate and return to suitability”.
D’Ath said she could have completely rescinded the suspended licence, but chose to defer it instead “because there is much more work to do”.
If Star fails to comply with the plan it would face further fines of up to $5m.
“Today’s announcement strikes the right balance between making sure The Star operates lawfully, ethically and in a way that enhances integrity, while also prioritising public confidence and local jobs,” the attorney general says. “The government remains committed to casino reform to address the significant failings identified in the Gotterson review and the findings of the many inquiries into casino operations across the country.” Star’s new $3.6bn Queens Wharf casino in Brisbane is expected to open in the first half of 2024.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.04am GMT
block-time published-time 1.20am GMT 
 Giant red pumpkin sculpture by Japan’s Kusama unveiled on Mornington Peninsula 
Australia’s first big polka dot pumpkin by Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama has been unveiled at Pt. Leo Estate on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula, AAP reports.
The three-metre-wide red and black gourd has been installed with a view of the sea, its design a famed example of the globally renowned artist’s work.
    Mornington Peninsula now has a red version of the artist’s giant yellow pumpkin that was damaged by a typhoon in Japan in 2021. Photograph: Nuala Mahon/Alamy   
“I am very pleased to showcase my work in such a wonderful place,” the artist says in a statement.
“The magical fusion of nature and my work is something special that can only be seen in each location.”
The Pt. Leo Estate features more than 50 sculptures from around the world, with the pumpkin joining a collection of artworks by the likes of KAWS, Jaume Plensa and Australians Inge King and Clement Meadmore.
Born in 1929, Kusama has become one of the world’s most successful artists, influencing her contemporaries Andy Warhol and Claes Oldenburg during the 1960s.
The dots reference her childhood, when she lived on a small farm and became lost in a field of flowers, which began to speak to her, the flower heads resembling dots that became her globally-recognised motif.
“A polka dot has the form of the sun … a symbol of the energy of the whole world and our living life, and also the form of the moon, which is calm,” she said.
Japan’s food supplies were disrupted during World War II, and the Kusama family’s storehouse was full of pumpkins, which she ate until she was sick of them.
The artist has painted their organic and irregular shapes for years. 
A much-loved yellow and black pumpkin sculpture, installed at the end of a pier on Japan’s Naoshima art island, made global headlines when it was washed out to sea during a typhoon in 2021.
The Mornington Peninsula artwork is open to visitors from Saturday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.38am GMT
block-time published-time 12.55am GMT 
 Lehrmann tells court he’d had concerns about ACT criminal trial 
 Bruce Lehrmann has told the federal court he has “serious concerns” about his criminal trial, which was aborted last year.
Lehrmann said he didn’t pay much attention to the summing up of the criminal case held in the ACT because of those concerns.
In December prosecutors dropped charges  against Lehrmann for the alleged rape of his former colleague Brittany Higgins, saying a retrial would pose an “unacceptable risk” to her health.
Lehrmann maintains his innocence and pleaded not guilty to one charge of sexual intercourse without consent, denying that any sexual activity had occurred.
    Journalist Lisa Wilkinson arrives at the Federal Court of Australia in Sydney as the trial continues in Bruce Lehrmann’s defamation cases against Network Ten. Photograph: Bianca de Marchi/AAP   
Network Ten’s barrister Matthew Collins KC is continuing his cross-examination of Lehrmann over the events of the day the alleged offence took place in 2019 when he and Higgins worked for Senator Linda Reynolds.
 Justice Michael Lee gave Lehrmann a short break from the witness box after he said his mind went blank and he couldn’t answer questions.
The former Liberal staffer had admitted telling three different stories – including two false accounts – about the reason for his after-hours visit to Parliament House.
“Do you recollect the chief justice [ Lucy McCallum ] relating to the jury questions that were put to you by the Australian Federal Police on the question of whether there was alcohol in your office?” Collins asked.
Lehrmann replied: “Not specifically, no.”
It is day three of his defamation trial  against Network Ten and Lisa Wilkinson in the federal court.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.47am GMT
block-time published-time 12.49am GMT 
 Victoria not getting a four-day work week any time soon, Premier Allan says 
Victoria’s premier, Jacinta Allan, says she has no plan to introduce a four-day work week to the public sector.
The Community and Public Sector Union has made a formal pilot program for a reduced-hours, four-day work week across various worksites a key part of its enterprise bargaining negotiations with the government.
But speaking in Bendigo on Friday, Allan shut down the idea:
There are no plans from the government to introduce across the public sector a four day working week and we’ll continue to negotiate with the public sector union.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.52am GMT
block-time published-time 12.36am GMT 
 Taylor Swift tickets remain elusive for some as wait times grow, prices soar 
It appears Taylor Swift fans have once again faced hurdles getting to see her enormously popular Eras Tour.
Fans have taken to X to express their frustrations at wait times and skyrocketing prices, something that has been an ongoing issue for many attempting to source the coveted tickets.
enltrIM BROKE AS FUCK ???? HELP #ticketek #ErasTour pic.twitter.com/iKVBFYSHNp
 — ki (@cantsleep995) November 24, 2023
enltrticketek u actually suck idk…. pic.twitter.com/j4kGqhlPzR
 — nakia (@moranavitaIIio) November 24, 2023
enltrA SAMPLE OF THE PRICING: A G RESERVE SEAT WENT FROM 79.90 TO $120 #ticketek #ErasTour
 — ki (@cantsleep995) November 24, 2023
enltrTHIS SONG SPEAKS TO MY INNER CORE RIGHT NOW. #ticketek #ErasTour pic.twitter.com/7OU4SZSiXq
 — ki (@cantsleep995) November 24, 2023
enltrI’m am so over ticketek pic.twitter.com/nbLSymf5Gg
 — Kayla ???????????????????? (@kaylasversion) November 24, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.41am GMT
block-time published-time 12.17am GMT 
 Don’t dream it’s over … because the house is never too crowded for another TV reboot 
A song by Australian band Crowded House that hit the US charts 35 years ago has topped Billboard’s Top TV songs chart, thanks to the reboot of a television series even older.
    Crowded House frontman Neil Finn wrote the big hit nearly 40 years ago, which has been given new life by US crime drama Magnum P.I. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP   
Don’t Dream It’s Over, written by Kiwi frontman Neil Finn and appearing on Crowded House’s 1986 self-titled debut album, was the band’s biggest international hit, making the top 10 in Australian, European and US markets and reaching number one in Canada and New Zealand. More than three decades later the song has topped Billboard’s TV songs chart for October this year, after it was played during an episode of Magnum PI , a remake of the action series that first appeared on American TV in 1980.
After Don’t Dream It’s Over played on NBC on 25 October, it accrued 4.6m official on-demand US streams and 1,000 downloads, according to Billboard.  Reignited interest in the song mirrors the surprise success of another 1980s hit gaining a second life thanks to television. Kate Bush’s Running Up That Hill, released in 1985, topped the TV songs chart for October 2022, after being played on Netflix’s hit series Stranger Things.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31am GMT
block-time published-time 11.59pm GMT 
 Drs, nurses and climate activists to blockade world’s largest coal port, Newcastle, this weekend 
Health professionals will be joining climate activists this weekend at the People’s Blockade of Newcastle coal port. They intend to spend 30 hours in canoes on the water, blocking shore access to all coal-carrying ships to the world’s largest coal port, as part of ongoing climate protests there.
    Medical professionals are so worried about the health risks linked to coal they plan to join climate protestors blockading Newcastle port, this weekend. Photograph: Daniel Munoz/Reuters   
The group, which includes representatives of Doctors for the Environment Australia (DEA) and Health on the Frontline (HOFL), will include public health and medical specialists, general practitioners, surgeons, nurses and allied health professionals, from around the country.
Public Health Professor, Dr Linda Selvey said part of the reason for their contribution to the protest action was the health risks associated with coal:
Coal is dangerous for human health. Burning fossil fuels is driving climate change and climate change is a health emergency. We need to respond as we would in any emergency, and we are not.
Retired public health professor, Dr Peter Sainsbury, said climate change “exceeds any public health threat” he has seen in his long medical career:
Climate change far exceeds any public health threat that I have seen in my 40 years as a public health doctor. We are running out of time to avert catastrophe. We need to act, in line with the science, immediately.
Both DEA and HOFL said in a statement they support the right to peaceful protest.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.47am GMT
block-time published-time 11.39pm GMT 
 Man arrested after police stand-off closes NSW north coast highway 
NSW Police have charged a man after a police operation closed several roads in the state’s north yesterday.
Police say that at about 8am yesterday, emergency services were called to a private property on the Bruxner Highway, Wollongbar, following a concern for welfare.
At about 2pm, a 45-year-old man was taken into custody by officers from the Tactical Operations Unit.
He was taken to Lismore Base Hospital for assessment before being taken to Lismore police station.
There he was charged with use carriage service to make hoax threat, give false information person/property in danger, and possess prohibited drug.
A further charge of contravene prohibition/restriction in AVO was laid in relation to a separate incident.
He was refused bail to appear before Lismore Local Court later today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.15pm GMT 
 Third day of Network Ten defamation case sees Lehrmann back in witness box  
 Bruce Lehrmann returns to the witness box this morning on day three of his defamation trial against Network Ten and journalist Lisa Wilkinson in the federal court. The court heard Lehrmann was fired by Senator Linda Reynolds for serious misconduct after a security breach involving confidential documents, as well as the security breach involving an after-hours visit with former colleague Brittany Higgins. Higgins alleges she was raped by Lehrmann on Reynolds’ couch, an accusation Lehrmann denies. Lehrmann’s barrister said in his opening address his client had been publicly maligned as a rapist and he was seeking vindication and compensation. Ten’s barrister Matt Collins KC asked Lehrmann why he described a serious security incident as a “very brief minor incident about security”.
“Do you remember giving that evidence?’’ Collins said on Thursday. “This wasn’t a minor incident about security, was it?” Lehrmann replied: “Well, no.” Collins asked: “Well, why did you choose only yesterday to say it was a very brief, minor incident about security when the true position is it was one of the grounds for your termination for serious misconduct?’’ Lehrmann replied: “Well, I still do not consider it a major security breach”. Lehrmann is yet to face Wilkinson’s silk Sue Chrysanthou.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.54pm GMT 
 Marketplace tickets to Taylor Swift go on sale 
And for those who are keen (I’m sure there are many of you), marketplace tickets to the extremely popular Australian leg of Taylor Swift’s Eras Tour are set to go on sale in the next 10 minutes.
    At least fans won’t have to queue in the heat and rain for the next leg of the US singer-songwriter’s Eras Tour. Photograph: Michael Tran/AFP/Getty Images   
It’s important to note these are not new tickets, but the Ticketek Marketplace, a place for people to sell tickets they don’t want. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.49am GMT
block-time published-time 10.40pm GMT 
 Victoria police arrest man over alleged Melbourne post office burglaries 
Victoria police have arrested a man following a series of alleged burglaries at post offices in Melbourne’s west.
Police allege almost $10,000 worth of parcels were stolen over the past three months.
Detectives from Wyndham crime investigation unit last Monday executed four warrants across the west, after two post offices in Werribee and Point Cook were allegedly broken into five times between September and October this year. A 30-year-old man was arrested during a search of his Werribee property and subsequently charged with five counts of burglary and possessing a drug of dependence. The Werribee man was remanded to appear before Sunshine magistrates court on 7 December.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.17pm GMT 
 Banks to change transaction system in $100m push to beat scammers  
Australian banks have joined forces to launch a new Scam-Safe accord, which will include a $100m investment by the industry in a new confirmation of payee system to be rolled out across all Australian banks.
Confirmation of payee will help reduce scams by ensuring people can confirm they are transferring money to the person they intend to. Customers should expect more warnings and delays when paying someone new or increasing payment limits.
With 15.4bn transactions worth $2.5tn occurring every year across the banking sector, the design and build of an industry-wide confirmation of payee system is a major undertaking. Design of the new system will start straight away and it will be built and rolled out over 2024 and 2025.
In addition, the Scam-Safe accord includes a major expansion of intelligence sharing across the sector with all banks acting on scams intelligence from the Australian Financial Crimes Exchange by mid-2024, and joining the Fraud Reporting Exchange. This means critical information is shared across the banking sector at speed about scam transactions, improving the chances of preventing scams and recovering stolen funds.
The Australian Banking Association chief executive, Anna Bligh, said:
This Scam-Safe accord is a new offensive in the war on scams. It reflects the banking sector’s unwavering commitment to safeguarding every Australian. It outlines the actions every bank will take to protect Australian consumers and small businesses and to harden the system against scams.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.49am GMT
block-time published-time 10.01pm GMT 
 Student striker says protest is for ‘the children of Gaza’ 
One of the speakers at today’s School Strike for Palestine has told AAP she is attending to use her voice for “the children of Gaza.”
Year 12 student Jaseena said the strike was about solidarity with the students of Gaza unable to attend school:
I want to use my voice for those children in Gaza who are not able to pursue their education and whose basic human rights have been stolen from them.
     Sydney school students are due to march today in support of Palestine, following Thursday’s student protest held in Melbourne’s CBD.  Photograph: Alex Zucco/SOPA Images/Shutterstock   
In a Facebook event listing, organisers urged students to “bring your friends and classmates and show that business as usual can’t continue while there is a genocide being committed in Gaza”.
“We’ll be walking out of school to demand an end to the bombing of Gaza, an end to the siege and an end to the occupation,” the group said.
Speakers at the Sydney Town Hall event will include striking high school students, the National Union of Students education officer and Palestinian and Jewish critics of Israel.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.36pm GMT 
 Out-of-control Perth bushfires show no sign of easing  
A bushfire emergency warning has been issued to areas in Wanneroo and Swann, as an out of control fire continues to rage in the area.
Authorities are warning residents bounded by Coogee Road, Bustard Road, Silver Road, Galah Road, Hawkins Road, Trichet Road, High Road, Scott Road, Belgrade Road, Franklin Road, Caporn Street, Pinjar Road, Da Vinci Park and Mornington Drive in Jandabup, Melalecu, Wanneroo and Mariginiup to leave now if the way is clear.
The emergency warning urges residents to act as soon as possible, adding that there is a threat to lives and homes. It comes as authorities warn strong winds and high temperatures mean it could be days before crews bring the fires under control after they ripped through semi-rural properties and threatened other homes on Thursday.
    A firefighting helicopter attempts to control a blaze bordering the suburbs of Wanneroo, Singara and Jandabup in Perth. Photograph: Aaron Bunch/AAP   
More than 150 firefighters worked through Wednesday night to save homes as the massive blaze forced hundreds of families to leave as embers rained down.
Teams worked on Thursday to assess damage to properties so evacuated residents could be informed, with fears more destroyed homes would be found.
The emergency services minister, Stephen Dawson, told AAP a huge amount of firefighting resources, including multiple water bombers, were being used to battle the blaze.
“This is a significant fire... this will be a long-running incident and could take some time before the fire is brought under control given the situation we find ourselves in in terms of the wind and high temperatures,” he said.
A number of firefighters have suffered smoke inhalation and minor injuries and one crew was involved in a “burn-over” incident while in a truck.
After peaking at 39C on Thursday, the temperature is set to ease to 35C on Friday and Saturday before rising to 37C on Sunday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.50am GMT
block-time published-time 9.16pm GMT 
 Burney says she has no regrets about referendum campaign strategy 
Burney has continued, saying she has no regrets on how she and the government approached the referendum.
I’m not a person who spends a lot of time looking at the entrails of things.
I’m more interested in going forward … we’ve been on this merry go round before. Sixty-five thousand years is a pretty long time and I don’t think that’s going to stop any time soon.
Burney also said she expected to remain in her portfolio:
I guess there’s a lot of speculation, post-referendum. But if ever anyone thinks that the Aboriginal affairs portfolio was just about the referendum, they are very, very wrong.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.58pm GMT 
 Linda Burney says government still deciding way forward after Indigenous voice loss  
The minister for Indigenous Australians, Linda Burney, has said the government is yet to decide how to best consult with First Nations people after the loss of the Indigenous voice referendum.
Burney was on RN Breakfast earlier and said today’s Closing the Gap meeting, the first since the referendum, would focus on the silver linings from the loss.
She also conceded that a tangible plan likely won’t emerge from the meeting today, with a long-term re-evaluation of Indigenous policy necessary to address Closing the Gap targets:
What we have seen is a group of young Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people get involved in the political process.
We had 6 million Australians say yes. And the thing that really excited me about the outcome in places like the Tiwi Islands, where … Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people wanted this change. And those votes are really important.
But clearly, we need to pursue that in the long run. Today’s meeting is about helping to frame up where we go but, most importantly, it’s about looking at the issues in Closing the Gap.
     The minister for Indigenous Australians, Linda Burney. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.40pm GMT 
 Labor tells students to stay in school 
Sticking with the School Strike, education minister Jason Clare has again pleaded with students to remain in class today.
Clearly believing teenagers respond well to being told what to do, Clare told Channel Seven’s Sunrise that children should stay in school if they want to “change the world.”
Education is the most powerful cause for good in this world, that is where you learn.
If you want to protest, do it on the weekend. School is on, we expect them to be there.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.21pm GMT 
 Dai Le says it’s ‘OK’ to miss a day of school due to protest 
Before the School Strike for Palestine planned today in Sydney and Wollongong, independent MP Dai Le says it’s “OK” to miss a day of school.
The western Sydney MP told the Today show young people have the right to express their opinion:
They believe they don’t have a voice at all in our elected representatives.
I think that absolutely they should be at school but children have the right to express their opinions and they’re at an age now where they can have that say.
Missing out on one day of school probably will be OK from my perspective.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.07pm GMT 
Good morning, Mostafa Rachwani with you this morning, to take you through the day’s news.
block-time published-time 7.58pm GMT 
 Students prepare to walk out of class to support Palestine 
Hundreds of school students are preparing to miss class to show support for Palestine as part of nationwide events, AAP reports.
The organisers of High Schoolers For Palestine are encouraging students to walk out of class across Sydney, Wollongong and Byron Bay to show support for the Palestinian cause.
Year 12 student and rally organiser Eva said attendees had a moral duty to show solidarity for children in Gaza.
“High school students in Gaza right now can’t go to school, can’t get an education,” she saidP.
“The least we can do here in Australia is come out to show our support for an end to the bombing.”
The New South Waleas premier, Chris Minns, and the education minister, Prue Car, told students to stay in class.
“If you want to change the world, get an education,” Minns said this week.
The Sydney rally is one in a series of national student strikes for Palestinians.
More than 1,000 Victorian school students blocked city streets and staged a sit-in at a major shopping centre in Melbourne on Thursday in support of Palestine.
In Adelaide, pupils held a demonstration at Parliament House.
    Student demonstrators at the intersection of Flinders Street and Swanston Street in Melbourne yesterday. Photograph: Alex Zucco/SOPA Images/Shutterstock    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.56pm GMT 
 Calls for urgent royal commission into domestic violence following deaths of four women in SA  
A royal commission into domestic violence is “urgently needed” following the deaths of four women in one week in South Australia, AAP reports.
Hundreds of advocates are expected to rally outside Parliament House in Adelaide today after the murder of 55-year-old mother Jodie Jewell by her husband on Tuesday rounded off a horrific seven days for the state.
Domestic violence services peak body Embolden SA co-chair Maria Hagias said a national probe would mean better-targeted funding.
“A royal commission will help our state target much-needed investment where it will have the most impact, across prevention, early intervention, crisis response and recovery.”
New statistics from the AIHW show that more than half of assault injury hospitalisations in 2021–22 involving children under 15, where the perpetrator was specified, were domestic violence-related.
Latrobe University family violence researcher Leesa Hooker said a royal commission examining the issue at a national level would be a “fabulous start”.
“It is a crisis,” Hooker said.
The SA attorney general, Kyam Maher, said the government was looking to pass legislation to crack down on people who breach intervention orders, would review strangulation laws and is conducting consultation on coercive control laws.
 The national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.48pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.47pm GMT 
Bruce Lehrmann is due to continue to give evidence today in his defamation action against Network Ten and its presenter Lisa Wilkinson.
Yesterday his cross-examination began with questions over his after-hours visit to Parliament House with Brittany Higgins.
For more, read our report:
 Related:  Lies, whisky and an after-hours visit: Bruce Lehrmann admits he didn’t tell police truth during defamation trial cross examination
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.39pm GMT 
 Firefighters battle out-of-control blazes in WA  
Firefighters continue to battle out-of-control bushfires that have claimed at least 10 homes in metropolitan Perth, Australian Associated Press reports.
Authorities warned on Thursday it could be days before the fires were brought under control after they ripped through semi-rural properties and threatened more homes in up to eight suburbs.
As of 3am today, Western Australia emergency services had an emergency warning in place for four Perth suburbs in the City of Wanneroo and the City of Swan, in Perth’s north-east.
More than 150 firefighters worked through the night to save homes as the massive blaze in the city’s north forced hundreds of families to leave on Wednesday night as embers rained down on their homes.
Teams worked to assess damage to properties so evacuated residents could be informed, with fears more destroyed homes could be found.
More than 1,000 people were left without power as critical infrastructure was brought down in unforgiving temperatures that peaked at 40C, with winds of up to 80km/h fanning the flames.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.26pm GMT 
 Black Friday shopping splurge expected  
Australian shoppers are tipped to splurge a record amount in today’s Black Friday sales after a year of sluggish retail spending, Australian Associated Press reports.
The National Retail Association expects there will be up to $6.3bn worth of sales over a four-day period while comparison website Finder predicted a $6.7bn spend.
The association’s director, Rob Godwin, said many brands had brought their discounting strategies forward after a flat start to the festive season.
It is now the nation’s most popular sales event, with a Finder survey of 1,063 people showing up to 9.3 million Australians have already taken part or planned to shop the sales.
The large number of shoppers is partially attributed to people trying to find a way through rising cost of living pressures, Finder head of consumer research Graham Cooke said.
Cooke said the categories shoppers were planning to save on had not necessarily seen the highest price increases.
“Eight out of the top 10 price increases are for food items – so consumers might be better off hunting for discounts in the grocery aisle rather than the clothes shop,” he said.
Black Friday sales are held on the Friday after Thanksgiving in the United States and gained traction in Australia in the past decade.
    Australian shoppers are expected to spend a record amount in today’s Black Friday sales. Photograph: Diego Fedele/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.24pm GMT 
 Welcome  
Good morning and welcome to our rolling news blog. I’m Martin Farrer and after I’ve run through a couple of overnight stories and breaking news my colleague Mostafa Rachwani will step up to the plate.
In February, the Productivity Commission was asked what an affordable, accessible, high-quality, universal early education system should look like. Its new report  calls for all under-fives to be able to access at least three days of childcare a week regardless of their parents’ work or income – and families earning less than $80,000 should get a universal 90% subsidy rate.
The home affairs minister, Clare O’Neil, says that the indefinite detainee NZYQ at the heart of the government’s difficulties over its asylum policy could have been deported – but almost all of the facts suggest otherwise. So what’s going on? Our chief political correspondent Paul Karp investigates.  The whole issue of illegal migration will get another turbocharge after a group of migrants were detected  on a remote beach in Western Australia. Expect some opportunistic questioning from the Coalition.
Still out west, more than 150 firefighters have been battling a massive blaze in the Perth’s northern suburbs  overnight after it destroyed 10 homes and forced hundreds of local families to leave as embers rained down on their streets. The state’s emergency commissioner said the blaze was unlikely to be brought under control for days as firefighters were hampered by strong north-easterly winds bringing dry air across the land.
And it’s expected to be another big day on the stand for Bruce Lehrmann in his defamation fight against Channel Ten. We’ll have all the latest developments.

Load-Date: November 24, 2023


End of Document




Suella Braverman calls for annual cap on net migration, saying new figures ‘slap in face to British public’ – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 23, 2023 Thursday 8:43 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITICS; Version:19
Length: 7658 words
Byline: Andrew Sparrow
Highlight: Former home secretary says pressure on housing, the NHS, schools, wages, and community cohesion, is unsustainable. This live blog is closed
Body


block-time published-time 5.34pm GMT 
 Afternoon summary  Net migration boosted the UK population by a record 745,000 in the year to December 2022, fuelled in part by a surge in overseas professionals arriving to work in the NHS and care homes and prompting a furious response from rightwing Conservatives.  The former home secretary Suella Braverman called the figures “a slap in the face to the British public” and called for much tougher visa restrictions and an annual cap on net migration. (See 4.09pm. )The Labour MP Alex Cunningham has said that he does not accept James Cleverly’s claim that, in the Commons yesterday, he did not call Stockton a “shit-hole”, but he did call Cunningham, one of its MPs, a “shit”. The home secretary issued this account of what happened after Ben Houchen, the Tory Tees Valley mayor, joined Labour MPs saying Cleverly should apologise for his slur on the town. (See 2.20pm. ) Cunningham told Radio 4’s PM programme he did not believe Cleverly’s new version of what happend and that people had seen the minister describe the town as a “shit-hole”. He went on:
I want an apology for the people of my community who are really upset about this.
As Mark Brown reports, Cleverly’s comment has provoked fury in the town.
 Related:  ‘What he said is disgusting’: Stockton seethes over minister’s alleged jibe
But Houchen has welcomed Cleverly’s apology, describing him as “a good guy who made a mistake”.
I’m pleased James Cleverly has apologised for using unparliamentary language Whatever was said, the speculation dragged Stockton’s name through the mud, which is unacceptable We’re all human & he’s a good guy who made a mistake Now let’s get back to building Teesside
enltrI’m pleased James Cleverly has apologised for using unparliamentary language Whatever was said, the speculation dragged Stockton’s name through the mud, which is unacceptable We’re all human & he’s a good guy who made a mistake Now let’s get back to building Teesside https://t.co/6wboa1b3fZ
 — Ben Houchen (@BenHouchen) November 23, 2023 British households are on course to be worse off at the end of a parliamentary term for the first time in modern history, leading economists have warned, after Jeremy Hunt’s £20bn autumn statement tax cuts favoured the richest 20% of earners. Jeremy Hunt has said he did not opt for “crowd-pleasing taxes” in his autumn statement as a pre-election giveaway, adding the government’s “long-term goal” is to boost the economy. The Scottish health secretary, Michael Matheson, is to be investigated by Holyrood authorities over the near-£11,000 bill racked up on his work iPad.      David Cameron, the foreign secretary, meeting Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Jerusalem today. Photograph: GPO/KOBI GIDEON HANDOUT/EPA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.17pm GMT 
A reader asks:
Regarding the immigration numbers it would be interesting to know how many are students and how many have come to work in the NHS.
Is there anywhere where these numbers are available or (and this wouldn’t surprise me) do the government not know?
These figures are all in the ONS report. 
It says study is the biggest reason for non-EU immigration.
The largest contributor to non-EU immigration (39%) was study, which was largely unchanged compared with YE June 22; however, while historic evidence has shown that more than 80% of students typically left within 5 years, analysis of more recent cohorts is suggesting that more are staying for longer and transitioning onto work visas …
Those immigrating long-term on study-related visas (main applicants and dependants) made up 39% of non-EU long-term immigration at 378,000 in the YE June 2023. This is an increase from 320,000 in the YE June 2022. This increase is mainly attributed to dependants (from 58,000 in YE June 2022 to 96,000 in YE June 2023). The Home Office’s statistics report, Why do people come to the UK? To study , suggests that this is because of an increase in the number of visas granted to dependants from Nigeria and India.
The increase in the number of people coming to the UK to study in the last two years may partly be reflected in the attraction of the new Graduate visa route. This visa route allows international students to apply to work in the UK for at least two years after completing their studies.
But it also says that it is the increase in people coming to work is what has been driving the overall increase in non-EU immigration.
The increase in non-EU immigration in the YE June 2023 was mainly driven by migrants coming for work (up to 33% from 23% in YE June 2022), largely attributed to those coming on health and care visas; in contrast, those arriving on humanitarian routes decreased from 19% to 9% over the same period …
Those immigrating long-term on work-related visas (main applicants and dependants) made up 33% of non-EU long-term immigration in the YE June 2023, with an estimated 322,000 arrivals. This is compared with 198,000 in YE June 2022. This is split fairly evenly between main applicants (169,000) and dependants (154,000).
The Home Office’s statistics report, Why do people come to the UK? To work , shows growth in long-term sponsored work visas following the introduction of the “Skilled Worker” and “Skilled Worker - Health and Care” visas in 2020. Health and Care work visas were the most common type of work visa that dependants came to the UK on and is driving the increase in immigration of those on work dependant visas (from 86,000 in YE June 2022 to 154,000 in YE June 2023).
block-time published-time 4.50pm GMT 
 Badenoch tells inquiry extra funding would not have stopped ethnic minorities being disproportionately affected by Covid  
 Kemi Badenoch told the Covid inquiry additional funding would not have stopped ethnic minorities being disproportionately affected by Covid.
The equalities minister insisted:
Being an ethnic minority was not the cause of being disproportionately impacted. It correlated with what the causes were – the co-morbidities. So you have to tackle the actual cause, not the thing that comes in common with it.
There was no perfect way of finding a particular group to give extra cash to. And extra cash, in and of itself, would not have solved the problem which you were trying to resolve of trying to make sure people were protected and away from the virus.
Questioning her, Prof Leslie Thomas KC, of the Federation of Ethnic Minority Healthcare Organisations, argued “structural inequalities” could have been one of the causes, including poverty and discrimination.
But Badenoch said there was no “silver bullet” to resolving such issues, noting her team had not found structural inequalities in the research they undertook.
She said:
In terms of the issues around deprivation, poverty – a lot of work was done to look at what we could do to fix that but we can’t cure diabetes, we can’t remove poverty.
Reflecting on the broader levels of financial support given during the pandemic, she said it was inevitable some people felt excluded. “There will always be people who feel that they’re on the wrong side” regardless of where the boundary was drawn on support, she said.
Reflecting on what more could have been done to mitigate the disproportionate impact of Covid on disabled people and ethnic minorities, Badenoch said “joining forces” with the disabilities minister wouldn’t have made a difference.
She went as far as saying it was not possible to prepare for the pandemic, or have a government response ready.
I think just because you’re looking at things separately doesn’t mean there’s a hierarchy of needs. The evidence showed that disabled people were more impacted and we were keen to ensure that it was the people who were most impacted that got the most attention.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.42pm GMT 
 Rees-Mogg suggests, if farmers can't produce fruit without foreign pickers, UK should just import it instead  
 Sir Jacob Rees-Mogg, the former business secretary, told Radio 4’s The World at One that he was “embarrassed” as a Conservative by today’s net migration figures, which show the party is failing to keep the promise it made at the 2019 election. (See 11.33am. ) He said:
This is a phenomenally high level with economic consequences … I’m embarrassed that we haven’t achieved what we set out to achieve.
Rees-Mogg said the level of legal migration was a more serious problem than people crossing the Channel on small boats. “In terms of the numbers, the small boats is a distraction,” he said.
Asked if he agreed with Suella Braverman’s call for a cap on net migration numbers (see 4.06pm  ), Rees-Mogg said that this would be one way of reducing the numbers.
And when it was put to him that the UK needed to allow foreign workers to come to the country to pick fruit, he said he didn’t agree. He explained:
We don’t need fruit pickers. If fruit can be grown more cheaply and more economically in foreign countries, we should import fruit and focus on our competitive advantage.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.09pm GMT 
 Braverman calls for annual cap on net migration, saying today's figures 'slap in face to British public'  
 Suella Braverman, the former home secretary, has described today’s immigration figures as “a slap in the face to the British public”. She is calling for much tougher visa restrictions and an annual cap on net migration.
She has made her comments in a short thread on X starting here.
enltrToday’s record migration stats show we’ve let in an extra million people in just 2 years, a population equivalent to Birmingham. The pressure on housing, the NHS, schools, wages, and community cohesion, is unsustainable. When do we say: enough is enough? 1/3
— Suella Braverman MP (@SuellaBraverman) November 23, 2023
Today’s record migration stats show we’ve let in an extra million people in just 2 years, a population equivalent to Birmingham. The pressure on housing, the NHS, schools, wages, and community cohesion, is unsustainable. When do we say: enough is enough? 1/3
We were elected on a pledge to reduce net migration, which was 229k in 2019. Today’s record numbers are a slap in the face to the British public who have voted to control and reduce migration at every opportunity. We must act now to reduce migration to sustainable levels. 2/3
Brexit gave us the tools. It’s time to use them. As HS I pushed to: - Put an annual cap on net migration; - Raise the salary threshold to £45k (excluding health & social care); - Close the graduate visa route; - Cap health & social care visas; - Limit dependents on all visas. 3/3
block-time published-time 3.57pm GMT 
 Kemi Badenoch, the business and trade secretary, has said the government is not doing enough to combat online misinformation.
She made the comment to the Covid inquiry, where she was giving evidence today in her role as minister for women and equalities.
Referring to misinformation that spread during the pandemic, she said:
I say this, even as a constituency MP, the number of people who come up to me in the street and tell me that I am part of a grand conspiracy to infect them, and ‘so-and-so died’ because of the material that we were putting out.
I don’t think government has got a handle on dealing with misinformation. I don’t think that we have adapted to this age of social media where information travels at lightning speed across the world.
I don’t know how we solve it, but in terms of gaps, I think there is a lesson in the pandemic that this is an area that needs some addressing.
Badenoch said she has heard there is a lot of work going on in departments on the issue, but added: “I don’t see it.”
Referring to deaths during the pandemic, Badenoch also said that, if ethnicity had been recorded on death certificates, the disproportionate impact of Covid on ethnic minority people might have come to light sooner. She said:
One of the recommendations I think that would have come in an earlier report was even about recording ethnicity on death certificates, which was something that we discovered was not being done and was a big issue.
I felt that if we had had that – I don’t know why it wasn’t recorded, I don’t know if there was ever a reason, it was just something that wasn’t recorded – if we had had that, we might, not certainly, but we might have been able to spot the disproportionate impact a little bit earlier.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.19pm GMT 
     Keir Starmer and the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, during their visit to Tilbury freeport in Essex. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.17pm GMT 
In the light of today’s ONS figures ,  Rob Ford, the politics professor who co-wrote Brexitland , one of the best books on the electoral trends explaining the vote to leave the EU, has posted a good thread on Twitter about attitudes to immigration. He says public support for restrictions on immigration has fallen significantly. The thread starts here.
A few slides from my recent lecture on long term trends in immigration attitudes which may be pertinent today: 1. Though migration is at record highs, the LT trend in public support for restricting migration is *downwards*
enltrA few slides from my recent lecture on long term trends in immigration attitudes which may be pertinent today: 1. Though migration is at record highs, the LT trend in public support for restricting migration is *downwards* pic.twitter.com/6HCjw6AqvK
 — Rob Ford (@robfordmancs) November 23, 2023
And here are some of his posts.
All of this represents a *huge* shift in the politics of immigration now compared to a decade or two ago. Opposition to immigration is *lower*, immigration is *less salient* and concern about it is now more concentrated in particular political and social groups
Instead, immigration has become a “wedge issue” for the Conservatives. They cannot ignore intense concern about it among about half of their current base. But talking about it constantly risks looking out of touch with swing voters who don’t prioritise it or see it positively.
Tl;dr - immigration remains a polarising issue. But that doesn’t mean the politics of immigration in 2024 will be like the politics of immigration in 2001-2016. The landscape of opinion has changed dramatically in the last decade.
block-time published-time 2.59pm GMT 
 Cleverly did call Labour MP 'shit', but did not use similar term about his constituency, source close to home secretary claims  
 James Cleverly, the home secretary, has suggested that he was misheard in the Commons yesterday, saying that while he did call a Labour MP “shit”, he did not describe the MP’s constituency as a “shit-hole”.
He will be hoping that his revised explanation ends a row that escalated this afternoon when Ben Houchen, the Conservative Tees Valley mayor, joined Labour MPs in saying Cleverly should apologise for his remarks about Stockton. (See 2.20pm. )
The row started when Labour’s Alex Cunningham asked why child poverty was so high in his constituency during PMQs yesterday. Labour MPs believe that, as Rishi Sunak was getting up to respond officially, Cleverly, who was sitting beside him, said it was because the town was a “shit-hole”.
In response to the accusation, a spokesperson for Cleverly said yesterday: “He did not say that, and would not. He’s disappointed people would accuse him of doing so.”
This afternoon a source close to Cleverly told PA Media his off-the-cuff remark in the Commons had been directed at the MP, rather than his constituency. The source said:
James made a comment. He called Alex Cunningham a shit MP. He apologises for unparliamentary language.
As was made clear yesterday, he would never criticise Stockton. He’s campaigned in Stockton and is clear that it is a great place.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.20pm GMT 
 Tory Tees Valley mayor Ben Houchen says Cleverly should apologise for calling Stockton 'shit-hole'  
 Ben Houchen, the Conservative Tees Valley mayor, has joined Labour MPs in saying James Cleverly, the home secretary, should apologise for calling Stockton a shit-hole during PMQs yesterday.
Cleverly, through a spokesperson, has denied using the remark.  But his critics believe his voice can be heard on the recording  of MPs heckling Labour’s Alex Cunningham, who represents Stockton North, after he asked a question yesterday about poverty in the town.
In a statement posted on X, which shows Houchen does not accept Cleverly’s denial, Houchen says:
It is clear to me that the home secretary, James Cleverley, should apologise for dragging Stockton’s name through the mud …
This type of language only furthers the outdated and inaccurate stereotypes we’ve battled for years …
Childish and unprofessional language used by Westminster politicians, who should know better, does nothing to help our plans for progress.
enltrIt is clear to me that the Home Secretary, James Cleverley, should apologise for dragging Stockton’s name through the mud. pic.twitter.com/3I55wRGJ25
 — Ben Houchen (@BenHouchen) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.45pm GMT 
 Starmer calls latest net migration figures 'shockingly high'  
 Keir Starmer has described today’s net migration figures , showing it at 745,000 in the year to December 2022 (a figure that has been revised upwards) and 672,000 in the year to June 2023, as “shockingly high”. Echoing language used by Yvette Cooper (see 1.07pm  ), Starmer said:
That figure is shockingly high. It represents a failure, not just of immigration, but also of asylum and of the economy.
Because within that figure there’s a huge increase in work visas, which shows the government hasn’t done what it needs to do on skills.
Within that number there are a rising number of asylum seekers and disclosure that the hotel bills are going up and up.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.38pm GMT 
     Keir Starmer and the shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, during a visit to Tilbury freeport in Essex this morning. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.34pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.38pm GMT 
 Starmer says autumn statement won't stop people getting poorer  
 Keir Starmer has said that the autumn statement won’t stop people getting poorer over the course of this parliament. Speaking to broadcasters on a visit to Essex, he said:
Whichever way the government tried to spin the autumn statement, the reality is that living standards are dropping, the tax burden is going up and that disposable income at the end of this government is going to be less than it was at the beginning for ordinary working people.
That’s worth thinking about. That means people will have less money in their pocket at the end of this government than they had at the beginning. [See 12.48pm. ]
Starmer also said a Labour government would have “tough choices” to make on public spending if it came to power. But he said the party had plans to raise funds through some tax rises that it has announced, and he said Labour would champion growth.
If we are privileged enough to come into power, I don’t underestimate the challenges that we will face because of the 13 years of failure that we’ve already had. That will require tough choices. But we have already said where we will increase tax …
The underlying answer has to be about economic growth. And if you’re going to have economic growth, you need a realisable plan that’s worked with business to make it actually work.
The government says it wants growth, but just look at the forecast they’ve got after 13 years of near negligible growth. They’ve now got a forecast that it’s not going to grow very much in the future.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.07pm GMT 
 Labour says today's figures show 'scale of utter Tory failure on immigration'  
Labour says today’s ONS figures  show “the scale of utter Tory failure on immigration”. This is from Yvette Cooper, the shadow home secretary.
Today’s net migration statistics, including a 65% increase in net migration for work, show the scale of utter Tory failure on immigration, asylum and the economy.
These figures are driven by a 54% increase in work visas and a 156% increase in health and social care visas which prove the Conservatives’ abysmal record on skills, training and workforce planning, as they have run our economy into the ground.
They are still failing to make changes Labour has called for to end the 20% wage discount  in the immigration system and to link it to training requirements.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.58pm GMT 
 No 10 says net migration 'far too high' and that there's 'much more to do' in reducing it  
Downing Street has said that net migration is “far too high”.
Commenting on today’s figures from the ONS , the PM’s spokesperson said the government was working to bring numbers down, but he said there was “much more to do”. He told reporters at the lobby briefing:
Net migration remains far too high. That’s why we are taking action to bring it down. That is what the British public expect.
That’s why in May we announced the toughest-ever action to reduce migration. That includes clamping down on the roughly 150,000 dependants of students who come into the UK every year and introducing an additional immigration health surcharge and raising visa costs.
We know this is predicted to lead to significant reductions. As we’ve seen today, the ONS figures show migration is now reducing year on year [see 10.06am  ], but we believe there is much more to do.
Where the system is being abused, we will leave no stone unturned in rooting that out so companies and individuals cannot exploit our system.
Asked why the government did not just issue fewer visas, the spokesperson said it was important to “strike the right balance” and that it was necessary to allow foreign workers in to address “short-term pressures” in areas, such as health and social care. He went on:
It is important that we take the time to consider carefully how we approach this, given the importance that a number of migrants can contribute – whether that’s to our health and care sector, or elsewhere to the wider economy.
We do believe there is further to go here and that’s why we’re keeping it under review.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.48pm GMT 
In its own report  on the autumn statement, the Resolution Foundation thinktank says this will be the first parliament on record in which household incomes in real terms will be lower at the end than at the beginning. (See 9.02am. ) Here is the chart illustrating this.
    Real household income growth parliament by parliament Photograph: Resolution Foundation    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.35pm GMT 
The Institute for Fiscal Studies has also published a distributional impact  of the autumn statement. Confirming what other researchers have said , it shows that the measures announced yesterday (the green bars on the graph – cuts to national insurance contributions and the increase in local housing allowance rates) benefit the richest households most. But, if all tax and benefit measures from April 2019 are included, the poorest 10% of households have gained most.
(In fact, the poorest 10% of households are the only group that have gained overall. But the changes have been progressive, in that wealthier households have lost out more – both proportionally and in cash terms – than poorer ones.)
    Distributional impact of autumn statement Photograph: IFS      
block-time published-time 12.20pm GMT 
 Hunt's tax cuts give back less than 25p for every £1 taken by Treasury in increased taxes since 2021, IFS says  
Turning back to the Institute for Fiscal Studies ’ assessment of the autumn statement , it says that Jeremy Hunt’s tax cuts yesterday return less than £1 to taxpayers for every extra £4 they are paying because of tax rises since 2021.
Another way of putting that would be to say that, for every £1 the Treasury has taken, less than 25p is coming back under yesterday’s measures.
This is from the analysis by the IFS’s Robert Joyce.
The headline measures in this autumn statement were cuts to the rates of national insurance contributions for employees and the self-employed. Taken in isolation, these put money back into the pockets of almost 30 million workers at a cost of around £10 billion per year, with anyone earning at least £12,570, or making profits of at least £6,725, per year benefitting.
The bigger picture is that these changes give back less than £1 of every £4 that is being taken away from households through changes to NICs and income tax announced since March 2021. Those takeaways are far less transparent than the smaller giveaway announced today - implemented as they are through multi-year freezes to income tax and NICs thresholds, which gradually bring more and more people into higher tax brackets, and especially so at a time of high inflation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.58am GMT 
 Labour says Cameron should reveal more details of his role in China-linked port project in Sri Lanka  
Labour wants David Cameron to reveal the extent of his links to a Chinese-backed enterprise, PA Media reports. PA says:
Labour has questioned reports of the foreign secretary’s links to a Sri Lankan port development and its ties with the Chinese government. 
MPs also continued to question the Tory peer’s role in the Greensill affair, in which he privately lobbied ministers in an attempt to win access for the now-collapsed financial firm to an emergency coronavirus loan scheme.
During Cabinet Office questions in the Commons, Labour’s Pat McFadden asked who the “ultimate client” was for Cameron’s “role in promoting the Port City Colombo project in Sri Lanka”, and if it was a company owned by the Chinese state.
The project is part of China’s global infrastructure strategy, the belt and road initiative, with Chinese companies involved in its construction.
The Cabinet Office minister John Glen replied: “This isn’t a matter for me. This is a matter for the processes that I have set out which have been complied with. And I believe Lord Cameron has made some comments with respect to those matters.”
 McFadden had earlier asked “whether all benefits in kind received by the foreign secretary while he acted as a lobbyist for Greensill Capital have been properly declared”, and whether the former prime minister’s tax affairs were examined and considered by the House of Lords appointments commission before his peerage was approved.
 Glen replied: “I’m not going to comment on media speculation … Lord Cameron’s appointment followed all the established processes for both peerages and ministerial appointments. The ennoblement was approved by the House of Lords appointments commission in the usual way, and that included a check with HMRC.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.33am GMT 
 Tory MPs say party faces 'do or die' moment if Sunak can't slash immigration before next election  
The New Conservatives, a group of rightwing Tory MPs co-chaired by Miriam Cates and Danny Kruger, have expressed alarm about today’s net migration figure.
In a statement, the group says that this is a “do or die” moment for the Tories and that Rishi Sunak should publish plans to show how the party will get net migration below 229,000, the level it was at the time of the last election, when reducing migration was a Tory manifesto promise. The New Conservatives say this must happen by the next election, which must be held by January 2025 at the latest.
They say:
For the Treasury, there may be reasonable arguments for increasing immigration – because more people translates into more recorded economic activity – but the truth is the public won’t accept it. Our voters can tell the difference between real economic growth that improves the standard of living for ordinary households, and the phantom ‘growth’ that importing ever more people puts on a Treasury spreadsheet.
High rates of immigration depress wages, reduce investment in skills and technology, put unsustainable pressure on housing and public services, and threaten community cohesion.
The word ‘existential’ has been used a lot in recent days but this really is ‘do or die’ for our party. Each of us made a promise to the electorate. We don’t believe that such promises can be ignored.
The government must propose, today, a comprehensive package of measures to meet the manifesto promise by the time of the next election. We will assess any such package and report publicly on whether it will meet the promise made to the electorate.
The New Conservatives include prominent supporters of Suella Braverman, the former home secretary who has herself criticised Sunak for not doing enough to bring down immigration.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.52am GMT
block-time published-time 11.22am GMT 
     Jeremy Hunt, centre, on a visit to the Airbus factory in Broughton, north Wales, this morning. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AP      
block-time published-time 11.14am GMT 
 Hancock, Gove, Raab and Javid due to give evidence to Covid inquiry next week  
The Covid inquiry has announced its timetable for hearings next week. Matt Hancock, the former health secretary, who has been repeatedly accused by witnesses to the inquiry of giving false assurances to colleagues, is due to give evidence for a day and a half, starting on Thursday. And Michael Gove, who as Cabinet Office minister at the time was one of the lead ministers dealing with Covid, is due to give evidence for most of Tuesday.
Sajid Javid, another former health secretary, and Dominic Raab, foreign secretary and first secretary of state during most of the Covid crisis, and stand-in PM when Boris Johnson was ill, are due to appear on Wednesday.
Here is the full schedule. 
    Timetable for hearings next week Photograph: Covid inquiry   
This timetable suggests Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak may appear the following week.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.54am GMT
block-time published-time 10.55am GMT 
 Hunt has paid for tax cuts with unrealistic spending cuts which create huge problems for next chancellor, IFS says  
The Institute for Fiscal Studies has released its full assessment  of the autumn statement. In his summary , Paul Johnson, the IFS director, says Jeremy Hunt’s tax cuts are “paid for by planned real cuts in public service spending” which are not credible. He says this means Hunt has left a huge problem for whoever is chancellor after the next election. He explains:
The net result is that Mr Hunt is, by the narrowest of tiny margins, still on course to meet his (poorly designed) fiscal rule that debt as a fraction of national income should be falling in the last year of the forecast period. In reality debt is set to be just about flat at around 93 per cent of national income over the whole period. And that is on the basis of a series of questionable, if not plain implausible, assumptions. It assumes that many aspects of day to day public service spending will be cut. It assumes a substantial real cut in public investment spending. It assumes that rates of fuel duties will rise year on year with inflation – which they have not done in more than a decade and they surely will not do next April. It assumes that the constant roll over of “temporary” business rates cuts will stop. It assumes, of course, that the economy doesn’t suffer any negative shocks.
Like his predecessors Mr Hunt has taken a modest improvement in the public finance forecasts and spent most of it. He has spent up front and told us he will meet his targets largely by unspecified fiscal restraint at some point in the future. What he will do in March if the OBR downgrades its forecasts we do not know. Any such downgrading would leave him with a big headache. More importantly he or his successor is going to have the mother and father of a headache when it comes to making the tough decisions implied by this statement in a year or two’s time.
And here is Johnson’s conclusion.
The fiscal forecasts have not in any real sense got better. Debt is not declining over time. Taxes are still heading to record levels. Spending is also due to stay high by historic standards, not least because of high debt interest payments. But those payments plus pressures on health and pension spending mean current plans are for some pretty serious cuts across other areas of public spending. How did Mr Hunt afford tax cuts when real economic forecasts got no better? He banked additional revenue from higher inflation, and pencilled in harsher cuts to public spending.
I’m not sure I’d want to be the chancellor inheriting this fiscal situation in a year’s time.
     Paul Johnson. Photograph: Johnny Armstead/REX/Shutterstock      
block-time published-time 10.29am GMT 
 Cameron visits scene of one of last month's Hamas massacres in Israel  
 David Cameron, the new foreign secretary, is in Israel, where he visited Kibbutz Be’eri, the scene of one of the Hamas massacres last month. He said:
I wanted to come here to see it for myself; I have heard and seen things I will never forget.
Today is also a day where we hope to see progress on the humanitarian pause.
This is a crucial opportunity to get hostages out and aid in to Gaza, to help Palestinian civilians who are facing a growing humanitarian crisis.
As PA Media reports, Cameron’s visit comes a day after he met counterparts from Arab and Islamic countries – including the Palestinian Authority – at Lancaster House in London to discuss the Middle East crisis. Foreign ministers from Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, Turkey, Indonesia and Nigeria, as well as the secretary general of the League of Arab States and the ambassador of Qatar, attended the event.
Cameron said the group discussed how to use the planned pause in the Israel-Hamas fighting to consider “how we can build a peaceful future which provides security for Israel but also peace and stability for the Palestinian people”.
    David Cameron viewing a home destroyed in last month’s Hamas attack, with the Israeli foreign minister Eli Cohen (right). Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images      David Cameron viewing a house destroyed at Kibbutz Be’eri in the Hamas attack last month. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.56am GMT
block-time published-time 10.06am GMT 
 ONS puts net migration at 672,000, but says provisional figures suggest it might be falling from record high  
Here is the Office for National Statistics ’ report on migration figures.  (See 9.33am. )
Here is an extract from the ONS’s summary. It puts the latest annual net migration figure at 672,000, but says provisional figures suggest this is starting to fall from a record high. That would be due to immigration falling and emigration rising, it says.
The provisional estimate of total long-term immigration for year ending (YE) June 2023 was 1.2 million, while emigration was 508,000, meaning that net migration was 672,000; most people arriving to the UK in the YE June 2023 were non-EU nationals (968,000), followed by EU (129,000) and British (84,000).
Net migration for YE June 2023 was 672,000, which is slightly higher compared with YE June 2022 (607,000) but down on our updated estimate for YE December 2022 (745,000); while it is too early to say if this is the start of a new downward trend, these more recent estimates indicate a slowing of immigration coupled with increasing emigration.
Methods for measuring international migration are in development, and these timely estimates for year ending June 2023 and December 2022 are provisional, supported by assumptions that are informed by past behaviour; this means the uncertainty associated with these estimates will reduce in our next releases, when we have more data to confirm people’s long-term migration status.
Before the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, migration was relatively stable, but patterns and behaviours have been shifting considerably since then; net migration increased sharply since 2021 because of a rise in non-EU immigration driven by a range of factors including those arriving on humanitarian routes (including Ukrainian and British national (overseas) schemes), as well as an increase in non-EU students and workers.
And here is a table from the report.
    Net migration figures Photograph: ONS    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.07am GMT
block-time published-time 9.44am GMT 
 Hunt says he feels 'incredibly guilty' after autumn statement - because he did not buy his wife birthday present or even card  
 Jeremy Hunt does not seem to have any qualms about the Conservative party misleadingly saying taxes are going down, when the tax burden is going up.  (See 9.31am. ) But there is something about which he feels “incredibly guilty”. He told LBC this morning that, despite starting his autumn statement speech with a reference to it being his wife’s birthday, he did not get round to buying her a present – or even a card. He said:
I’m afraid I have not bought anything for my wife. I didn’t even get her a birthday card. I feel incredibly guilty.
What I did was publicly acknowledge her birthday to millions of people, which is something I haven’t done before. So, hopefully I will be able to make up for that at the weekend.
block-time published-time 9.33am GMT 
 Estimated net migration to UK in year to June 2023 was 672,000, ONS says  
PA Media has just snapped this.
Estimated net migration to the UK stood at a provisional 672,000 in the year to June 2023, up from 607,000 in the previous 12 months but below a revised record figure of 745,000 in the year to December 2022, the Office for National Statistics said.
block-time published-time 9.31am GMT 
 Hunt rejects claim it is misleading for Tories to say they are giving people 'biggest tax cut in British history'  
Yesterday the Conservative party released an advert in history saying Jeremy Hunt had announced “the biggest tax cut in British history”.
enltrThis is HUGE for business. It will be a big boost for the economy and living standards for families across the country. pic.twitter.com/G3scBSXt7A
 — Conservatives (@Conservatives) November 22, 2023
In an interview on the Today programme, Nick Robinson put it to Jeremy Hunt that this was “downright misleading” given the fact that the tax burden is at a record high. Hunt rejected this. He replied:
No. We’ve been very clear and upfront that we’ve had to take difficult decisions to increase taxes to pay down our Covid debt. But we are starting now to bring taxes down again. That is very significant.
block-time published-time 9.16am GMT 
 Hunt rejects claims his proposals to hold down government spending will make public services worse  
In his analysis of the autumn statement, Larry Elliott, the Guardian’s economics editor, described it as “a classic ‘live now, pay later’ ploy in which pre-election tax cuts are paid for by implausibly tough public spending plans in future years”.
 Related:  A ‘live now, pay later’ autumn statement – and yet election year still looks bleak | Larry Elliott
Larry is referring to the way the autumn statement includes spending plans for the future which have not gone up in line with inflation.  Most experts think they are unrealistic because they think in practice a future chancellor will have to spend more to stop public services collapsing.
In an interview with Times Radio, Hunt defended his spending plans. “We do need to be disciplined in public spending in the short run,” he said. But he claimed that this approach was necessary to stimulate growth.
And when it was put to him that his spending plans would lead to public services getting worse, he said he did not accept that. He explained:
No, and the reason is very straightforward. If we want to have money to invest in the NHS, in schools, in our armed forces over the longer term, you have to grow the economy.
That is the only way in the longer run that you can fund the cost of an ageing population and that’s why I took those decisions for the long term.
In the short run, I am showing discipline with public spending. I think that is the right thing to do. We need a more productive state, not a bigger state.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.34am GMT
block-time published-time 9.02am GMT 
 Households will be £1,900 poorer on average over course of this parliament, says thinktank  
Jeremy Hunt may claim that his autumn statement wasn’t influenced by election timing (see 8.43am  ), but that’s not the view of the Resolution Foundation. The thinktank has now published its analysis of the autumn statement  and its title is: “A pre-election Statement”. Here is a summary from Torsten Bell, the RF’s chief executive.
Jeremy Hunt yesterday got his pre-election giveaways in early, with an autumn statement offering tax cuts today, at the price of implausible spending cuts tomorrow. Well-targeted specifics, addressing problems such as our tax system’s bias against working-age earnings or benefit system’s failure to keep pace with fast-rising rents, were juxtaposed with far less well-designed big picture fiscal choices. Tax-cutting rhetoric clashed with tax-rising reality, and positive steps to encourage business investment combined with a growth-sapping hit to public investment.
Ultimately this reflects the pressures, not only of an upcoming election, but of governing a sicker, older, slower-growing Britain, amidst an era of far higher interest rates.
That might be difficult for policy makers, but it’s a disaster for households whose wages are stuck in a totally unprecedented 20-year stagnation. This parliament is set to achieve a truly grim new record: the first in which household incomes will be lower at its end than its beginning.
The thinktank says the fall in the value of real household incomes over the course of this parliament will work out at £1,900 on average in real terms. It says:
The biggest inflation shock in four decades, and taxes rising to their highest level in eight decades, means the outlook for living standards remains dire. Real household disposable income per person is expected to fall by 1.5 per cent in 2024 – presenting a bleak economic backdrop to the 2024 election. The last time RHDI fell in an election year was 50 years ago, in 1974. This helps drive a new grim record on living standards: this parliament is on track to be the first in which real household disposable incomes actually fall (by 3.1 per cent from December 2019 to January 2025): households will, on average, be £1,900 poorer at the end of this parliament than at its start.
The RF also says that around 40% of the gains from the tax and benefit measures announced yesterday will go to the richest fifth of the population. Graeme Wearden has more on this on his business live blog.
 Related:  Richest benefit most from autumn statement, analysis finds; Nissan to build new electric vehicles in Sunderland – business live
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.20am GMT
block-time published-time 8.43am GMT 
 Hunt says it is ‘silly’ to see his autumn statement tax cuts as pre-election giveaway  
Good morning. The tax cuts in Jeremy Hunt ’s autumn statement yesterday were larger than expected and, unusually, the national insurance cut will take effect from January, not April, when tax cuts or tax rises are normally implemented. Inevitably, that prompted speculation at Westminster  that Hunt was preparing for an early election.
But in an interview this morning Hunt claimed it was “silly” to view his tax cuts as a pre-election giveaway. He told Sky News:
We haven’t chosen the most populist tax cuts. I think it’s silly to think about this in terms of the timing of the next election.
We’re trying to make the right decisions for the long-term growth of the British economy.
enltr'Silly' to think of autumn statement in terms of election timing says Chancellor Jeremy Hunt https://t.co/PAiZ4D1jU3 ?? Sky 501, Virgin 602, Freeview 233 and YouTube pic.twitter.com/eoyfl1KJGy
 — Sky News (@SkyNews) November 23, 2023
Hunt also claimed he had not even discussed election timing with the PM. He told LBC:
I can confirm regarding the date of the election that I’ve had absolutely no discussions with the prime minister.
Those are some of the lines from Hunt’s morning interview round. I will post a full summary shortly.
Here is the agenda for the day.
9.30am: The ONS publishes its latest migration figures.
9.30am: Prof Dame Angela McLean, the government’s chief scientific adviser, gives evidence to the Covid inquiry. At 2pm Kemi Badenoch is due to give evidence as minister for women and equalities.
10.30am: The Institute for Fiscal Studies publishes its assessment of the autumn statement.
Morning: Jeremy Hunt is on a visit in Wrexham.
Morning: Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, are on a visit in Essex.
11.30am: Downing Street holds a lobby briefing.
12.30pm: Richard Hughes, chair of the Office for Budget Responsibility, speaks at an Institute for Government event.
Afternoon: Rishi Sunak is on a visit in Yorkshire.
If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.33am GMT

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




300 Palestinian women and children in Israeli jails listed before hostage swap
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 5:13 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:6
Length: 762 words
Byline: Bethan McKernan in Jerusalem
Highlight: An initial 10 Gaza hostages expected to be released, followed by 50 Palestinians, according to source
Body


Palestinian and Israeli officials have published the names of 300 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, at least some of whom are expected to be released in an exchange with Hamas in Gaza for dozens of Israeli hostages seized by the militant group on 7 October.
A four-day pause in hostilities in the six-week-old war between Israel and Hamas is due to go into effect on Thursday, the culmination of weeks of diplomacy mediated by Egypt, Qatar and the US.
An initial 10 hostages – children or elderly women – were expected to be released on Thursday morning, but late on Wednesday Israel’s national security adviser said the release would not happen before Friday.
“Negotiations for the release of our captives are progressing and continue all the time,” Israeli National Security Adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said in a statement.
“The start of the release will proceed according to the original agreement between the parties, and not before Friday,” Hanegbi said.
While details are still unclear, a source at the West Bank-based Palestinian Authority told the Guardian that it was thought that 50 Palestinian women and children would then be dropped off at the Beitunia checkpoint, near Ramallah, on Thursday afternoon.
As the families of abducted Israelis  endure an agonising wait to see if their loved ones will be able to return, excitement is also growing for Palestinians in occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank that their imprisoned loved ones may also be coming home.
Aseel Osama Shadeh, 17, was arrested this month after carrying a Hamas flag to a protest at the notorious Qalandiya checkpoint between Ramallah and Jerusalem – an offence under Israeli law.
Her father, Osama, said: “The Israeli soldiers shot her in the leg and arrested her, accusing her of carrying a knife, even though she was not.
“My daughter is a stubborn girl. We are a quiet family but she would not listen to us. We thought she would spend many years in jail. We are really happy she will be released.”
According to the Palestinian Prisoners Society, 7,200 prisoners are being held by Israel, among them 88 women and 250 children aged 17 and under. The plight of prisoners is a key issue for Palestinians: at least four in 10 Palestinian men spend at least some time in their life in Israeli prisons.
The hostage swap deal has also shone a light on Israeli detention and sentencing practices in the Palestinian territories, where Palestinians are tried in military courts and minors are regularly imprisoned.
All but four on the list of 300 are from the West Bank and Jerusalem. Israel refused to release anyone sentenced for murder; most are held for stone throwing, damaging property, having contact with “hostile” organisations, as well as more serious charges including stabbings and making explosives.
Many are held in administrative detention , which allows for pre-emptive arrest, on secret evidence, and six-month extendable stints in prison without charge or trial.
Jessica Montell, the executive director of HaMoked, said: “Some [on the list] have been convicted; the bulk of those to be released are detainees still awaiting trial, on charges that range from incitement to stone-throwing to attempted murder.
“Among those to be released are Palestinian women and children in administrative detention … These people should also have been released unconditionally, so a deal to release Israeli hostages and Palestinian administrative detainees is doubly welcome.”
The ceasefire deal includes a clause stipulating that for every 10 hostages that come home safely, there will be an additional day in which fighting is paused, up to a total of 10 days, and three times as many Palestinians in Israeli jails released.
During the ceasefire, aid and fuel is expected to reach the besieged Gaza Strip, where more than 12,000 people have been killed and much of the territory’s population of 2.3 million people have been displaced from their homes.
Israel has vowed to restart its war effort, launched in response to the Hamas killings of 1,200 Israelis on 7 October, after the initial goal of 50 out of 238 hostages are released.
Israel has a history of agreeing to asymmetric prisoner swaps: in 2011, Gilad Shalit, an Israeli soldier, returned home after five years of captivity in the Gaza Strip in exchange for 1,000 Palestinians in Israeli jails.
Foremost among them was Yahya Sinwar , who returned home to Gaza, eventually becoming Hamas’s most important leader in the territory.
 This article was amended on 23 November 2023 to refer to “stabbings” rather than “attempted stabbings”.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Benjamin Netanyahu warns war will continue until Hamas is eliminated
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 4:42 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:7
Length: 1414 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Israeli PM says conflict is not over after negotiation of four-day truce to release hostages in exchange for Palestinian prisonersIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Benjamin Netanyahu has warned that the war against Hamas will continue, despite a brief ceasefire set to start this week and the expected release of some of the hostages held in Gaza by the militant Islamist organisation.
“The war continues,” said the Israeli prime minister at a press conference in Tel Aviv.
“We continue until we have achieved complete victory … Eliminating Hamas , liberating our captives and making sure that post-Hamas there will be no threat to Israel.”
Netanyahu’s national security adviser said the release of dozens of hostages in exchange for Palestinian prisoners held by Israel had been delayed until Friday.
In a statement released late on Wednesday, Tzachi Hanegbi said that talks on the deal were continuing. “The release will begin according to the original agreement between the parties, and not before Friday,” he said.
The swap is to take place as part of the first ceasefire in seven weeks of war in Gaza, which is also due to come into effect on Friday and will last for a minimum of four days, officials from both Hamas and Israel have said.
The truce was announced early on Wednesday  after days of speculation. More than 100 Palestinians were reported killed within hours as Israeli forces continued attacking Gaza from land, sea and air.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
There will be a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza, with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. According to a Hamas statement, Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the truce.
The logistics of arranging the complex exchange of prisoners and hostages while enforcing a pause in fighting could still mean delays. 
The hostages to be freed are women and children, and the Palestinian prisoners are also women and people aged 18 and younger, both sides have confirmed.
If the first exchanges go well, and Hamas can locate more female hostages or children, there will be further releases on both sides, reports suggest.
The deal, struck after lengthy and complex talks mediated by Qatar , the US and Egypt, comes more than six weeks after the conflict began on 7 October, when Hamas launched attacks from Gaza into southern Israel, killing at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and taking more than 240 people hostage.
The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials. More are thought to be under rubble. Swaths of northern Gaza have been destroyed in the fighting, and up to a million people displaced.
Though the deal has raised hopes of a more durable cessation of hostilities Netanyahu has vowed to “complete the elimination of Hamas and ensure that there will be no new threat to the state of Israel from Gaza”. “We are at war, and we will continue the war,” he said. “We will continue until we achieve all our goals.”
The Israeli government approved the deal only after a sometimes acrimonious marathon overnight debate. Yoav Gallant, Israel’s defence minister, emphasised that “immediately after we have exhausted this phase”, military operations would “continue in full force”.
Israeli officials may be encouraged by the decision of Hezbollah, the Lebanon-based Islamist militia and political movement, to observe the truce, despite not having been involved in negotiations. Violence has increased along Israel’s northern frontier, with a series of tit-for-tat exchanges of fire.
The Israeli cabinet’s signoff was one of the last hurdles after what one US official described as five “extremely excruciating” weeks of talks.
One stumbling block was obtaining the consent of Yahya Sinwar, Hamas’s leader in Gaza, whose views have often diverged from those of Hamas leaders outside the territory.  This was “late coming”, analysts said. An official of the Islamist group said that “the resistance is committed to the truce as long as the occupation honours it”.
If the initial phase of the deal works, 150 more Palestinian prisoners could be released in a subsequent phase in exchange for 50 more hostages, according to an Israeli government document that named 300 eligible prisoners. For every 10 additional hostages released, there would be an extra day’s “pause” in fighting, the document said.
Israel’s Hostages and Missing Families Forum welcomed the deal. “We are very happy that a partial release is pending … but as of now, we don’t know exactly who will be released when,” the group said.
The lack of clarity over exactly who was to be freed caused distress on both sides.
“We don’t know who will get out because Hamas will release the names every evening of those who will get out the next day,” said Gilad Korngold, whose son and daughter-in-law are being held in Gaza along with their two children and other relatives.
Israel’s list of eligible Palestinian prisoners included 33 women and 123 young people, most of whom have been charged with public order offences or arson. No prisoners convicted of murder will be freed, local media reported, but two serving long sentences for stabbing an Israeli officer are on the list.
Amani Sarahneh, spokesperson for the Palestinian Prisoners’ Club advocacy group, said: “We don’t know who will be freed first, and that’s a problem for us in responding to the families.”
Among the Palestinians who could be released is Shorouq Dwayyat, who was convicted of attempted murder in a 2015 knife attack.  Her mother, Sameera Dwayyat, said she hoped her daughter would come out as part of a deal, but added that her relief was tempered by “great pain in my heart” over the dead children in Gaza.
A senior US official said three American hostages, including three-year-old Abigail Mor Idan , were among 50 people earmarked for release from Thursday. 
Even if fully implemented, the current agreement would still leave about 190 hostages in Gaza, about half of whom are thought to be military personnel.
The truce deal was welcomed by countries including Britain, China, France, Germany, Jordan and Egypt. 
Not all the hostages are being held by Hamas. Some are in the hands of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a separate extremist faction, and criminals in Gaza, say Israeli and other officials.
Almost half of the hostages have dual nationality, hailing from Argentina, Germany, America, France, Thailand, Nepal and Russia. 
The deal is a significant propaganda coup for Hamas and a personal victory for Sinwar, who spent 23 years in Israeli prisons before being released in an exchange in 2011. He tops Israel’s hitlist and his whereabouts are unknown.
Meeting the terms of the deal will require Hamas to ensure that all 50 hostages reach the borders of Gaza safely, a logistical challenge. The group indicated during negotiations that it did not know the exact location of every hostage because they were held by disparate groups.
Netanyahu will now be under domestic pressure to secure the release of the rest of the hostages, but faces growing political risks. Several far-right parties that are part of the ruling coalition on Tuesday evening opposed the proposed deal and called for the Israeli offensive in Gaza to be intensified to secure better terms. Their statements prompted protests in Tel Aviv by hostages’ families. If Israel does resume its offensive, its military is likely to attempt to advance into southern Gaza. It is not clear what would happen to the more than 2 million civilians sheltering there. Senior US officials have suggested they would not support any such offensive without a credible plan to protect that population.
Josep Borrell, the EU’s head of foreign affairs, said the Israeli military had told him they planned to create a “small safe area along the sea in the southern part of Gaza” for the civilian population “in order to carry out the ground operations in the south”.
Israeli military officials have suggested the plan in recent days, prompting deep concern even among staunch allies. “This did not reassure me about the future course of events if we fail to achieve a rapid and durable de-escalation of the military operations,” Borrell wrote.
                     Additional reporting by Lisa O’Carroll in Brussels                   

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war live: no hostages to be released before Friday, says Israeli official, amid reports ceasefire also delayed
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 3:10 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:49
Length: 22496 words
Byline: Helen Livingstone (now); Léonie Chao-Fong, Martin Belam and Helen Sullivan (earlier)
Highlight: National security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi announces delay hours before hostage release was expected to begin, while ceasefire also reportedly put backGaza hostage deal: what do we know?
Body


block-time published-time 3.13am GMT 
Here’s some more analysis from our correspondents Julian Borger in Washington, Jason Burke in Jerusalem, and Ruth Michaelson in Istanbul on how the Israel-Hamas ceasefire agreement came about:
The hostage deal that was finally agreed by the Israeli cabinet in the early hours of Wednesday was very similar in outline to what was on the table a month ago , according to sources familiar with the discussions.
In the intervening weeks, a lot has happened to turn the proposal to exchange women and children prisoners during a ceasefire into a near-reality.
Israel has mounted a ground offensive, seizing control of much of northern Gaza, and sending Hamas underground. The Israeli Defense Forces are now open to a tactical pause while decisions are made about how to move southwards.
Meanwhile, the government of Benjamin Netanyahu has been under acute and mounting pincer pressure: from the Biden administration, and internally from the hostages’ families and their sympathisers, who have waged a relentless public campaign to put the captives’ lives first.
Read more here:
 Related:  Secrecy and public anger: how the Israel/Hamas ceasefire deal came about
block-time published-time 2.48am GMT 
Various news agencies have been taken on tours of al-Shifa hospital  with the Israel Defence Forces.
Since Israel declared war against Hamas following its attack on 7 October, it has repeatedly accused the Islamic militant group of using Gaza’s hospitals as cover. It has paid special attention to al-Shifa, Gaza’s largest hospital, saying Hamas has hidden command centres and bunkers underneath the hospital’s sprawling grounds.
Associated Press has described how it was allowed access to Gaza on the condition that its journalist stay with the Israeli military convoy throughout the four-hour tour and submit all material to a military censor ahead of publication. It says there is no other way for foreign journalists to currently access the enclave.
The agency wrote that on the reporting trip the Israeli military unveiled what it claimed was a Hamas military facility under al-Shifa, showing to a group of foreign journalists what appears to be a subterranean dormitory. The news agency writes:
Dozens of soldiers escorted journalists through a narrow stone tunnel – which the military said stretched 150 meters (164 yards) to a series of underground bunkers beneath Shifa hospital in Gaza City.
The living quarters, located at the end of the tunnel, had an air conditioner, kitchen, bathroom and pair of metal cots in a room fashioned from rusty white tile. They appeared to be out of use.
Here is a picture from Reuters. The news agency explains that its images were reviewed by the IDF too as part of the conditions of the embed – but no photos were removed.
    An Israeli soldier stands in a room containing a sink inside a tunnel underneath al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters   
This picture from AFP was also taken during a controlled tour in Gaza and edited under the supervision of the Israeli military, according to the news agency.
    A soldier stands in what the Israeli army says is a tunnel dug by Hamas militants inside the al-Shifa hospital complex in Gaza City. Photograph: Ahikam Seri/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.49am GMT
block-time published-time 2.13am GMT 
 West risks complicity in Israeli war crimes, Arab and Muslim ministers warn  
The western powers on the UN security council face a choice of either demanding Israel  lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or being complicit in Israeli war crimes and collective punishment, foreign ministers from Arab and Muslim countries said on a visit to London on Wednesday.
The ministers are lobbying the five permanent members of the security council – China, France, Russia, the UK, and the US – to back a humanitarian resolution instructing Israel to allow UN agencies, and not the Israel Defense Forces, to check aid going through the Rafah crossing from Egypt to Gaza.  
They say the proposal is in line with practice in Syria, and reflects their concern that Israel is determined to depopulate Gaza slowly by making it uninhabitable.
The call came as the head of Unicef, Catherine Russell, told the UN security council that the Gaza Strip was now “the most dangerous place on earth to be a child” , adding that four-day humanitarian pauses were not sufficient to “put a stop to this carnage”. A consortium of aid agencies also questioned what could be delivered to Gaza during the truce, due to start on Thursday.
The group of foreign ministers, from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Indonesia, Turkey, Nigeria and Palestine, were in London for talks with the foreign secretary, David Cameron, before seeing the French president, Emmanuel Macron, later on Wednesday. They had already been to Beijing and Moscow.
 Related:  West risks being complicit in Israeli war crimes, warn Arab and Muslim foreign ministers
block-time published-time 1.44am GMT 
A prestigious journal published by Harvard Law School has been accused of censorship after it refused to publish an academic article accusing Israel  of committing genocide in Gaza, allegedly because editors feared a backlash.
The Harvard Law Review, which is run by the school’s student body, declined the 2,000-word essay – titled The Ongoing Nakba: Towards a Legal Framework for Palestine – by a Palestinian doctoral candidate, Rabea Eghbariah, after it had been edited, fact-checked and initially approved.
The article, commissioned after Hamas’s 7 October attack on Israel, followed by an Israeli assault on Gaza, would have been the first by a Palestinian scholar ever published by the review. The Intercept originally broke the story.
It argued that events in Gaza  – where more than 14,000 Palestinians have been killed since Israel launched its military offensive – met the terms of genocide as defined by the United Nations convention. The article also called for a legally recognised crime of “Nakba” (catastrophe), the Arab word used to describe the forced removal of Palestinians from their homes at the time of Israel’s founding in 1948.
 Related:  Harvard journal accused of censoring article blaming Israel for Gaza genocide
block-time published-time 1.16am GMT 
Here are some of the most recent images coming to us from Khan Younis in southern Gaza. Israel has been carrying out strikes on the south throughout the conflict, despite telling Palestinians to flee there for safety.
    The aftermath of an Israeli air strike on a house in Khan Younis. Photograph: Mohammed Salem/Reuters      Palestinians flee after an Israeli air strike on a house in Khan Younis. Photograph: Mohammed Salem/Reuters      The bodies of 111 Palestinians killed in Israeli strikes on Gaza were buried in a mass grave at Khan Younis cemetery. Photograph: Mohammed Saber/EPA      A Palestinian man carries the body of his niece, Hanan Kaloob, at Nasser hospital.  Photograph: Ahmad Hasaballah/Getty Images      Palestinian mourn the deaths of those killed in Israeli airstrikes as they collect their bodies in Khan Younis. Photograph: Ahmad Hasaballah/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 12.56am GMT 
 Lebanon's Hezbollah group confirms son of senior MP killed in Israeli strike  
Lebanon’s Iran-backed Hezbollah movement has officially confirmed that five of its fighters, including the son of a senior lawmaker, have been killed, amid skirmishes at the Israel-Lebanon border, according to AFP.
Abbas Raad, son of the head of Hezbollah’s parliamentary bloc Mohammed Raad, was “martyred on the road to Jerusalem”, the group said in a statement – the phrase it has been using to announce the death of its members due to Israeli fire since the war started on 7 October.
It issued separate statements with the identities and photographs of four other fighters who were also killed.
As we reported earlier , a source close to the family said that Abbas Raad “was killed with a number of other Hezbollah members” in an Israeli strike Wednesday on a house in south Lebanon’s Beit Yahun.
Since the Israel-Hamas war began on October 7, the frontier between Lebanon and Israel has seen escalating exchanges of fire, mainly between Israel and Shiite Muslim movement Hezbollah, but also Palestinian groups, raising fears of a broader conflagration.
Israel’s army said in statements Wednesday evening that it had struck a number of Hezbollah targets and sources of fire from Lebanon, including a Hezbollah “terrorist cell” and infrastructure.
Since the cross-border exchanges began, 107 people have been killed on the Lebanese side, according to an AFP tally. At least 75 are Hezbollah fighters but the toll also included at least 14 civilians, three of them journalists. 
Seven Hezbollah fighters have also been killed in Syria.
On the Israeli side, six soldiers and three civilians have been killed, according to authorities.
The strike came just hours after the four-day truce in Gaza was announced between Israel and Hamas, which is a Hezbollah ally.
Iran’s foreign minister Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, who visited Beirut on Wednesday, warned in an interview that if the Hamas-Israel ceasefire begins but “does not continue... the conditions in the region will not remain the same as before the ceasefire and the scope of the war will expand”.
block-time published-time 12.38am GMT 
A bit more on the delay to the ceasefire and hostage release courtesy of Reuters, which notes that neither side had announced time for either event, though an Egyptian security source told the new agency that mediators had sought a start time of 10am on Thursday. Reuters reports further:
Israel’s public broadcaster Kan, citing an unidentified Israeli official, reported there was a 24-hour delay because the agreement was not signed by Hamas and mediator Qatar. 
The official said they were optimistic the agreement would be carried out when it was signed.
“No one said there would be a release tomorrow except the media... We had to make it clear that no release is planned before Friday, because of the uncertainty that hostages’ families are facing,” Kan quoted a source in Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s office as saying.
block-time published-time 12.25am GMT 
US secretary of state Antony Blinken has also been on the telephone, talking to his Saudi counterpart Prince Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud,  in which the pair reaffirmed their commitment to preventing the further spread of the Israel-Palestinian conflict, the State Department said according to Reuters.
Blinken also welcomed Saudi Arabia’s efforts to secure a durable peace agreement in Yemen, the state department said.
There have been fears of a regional overspill, as violence has broken out along Israel’s northern border with Lebanon  and US forces have been attacked in Iraq and Syria.  Washington has blamed those attacks on groups backed by Iran.
 This week Yemen’s Houthi rebels also seized a cargo ship  in the Red Sea. 
block-time published-time 11.57pm GMT 
US President Joe Biden also spoke with the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim Bin Hamad al-Thani, to thank him for his “personal” role in reaching the hostage and ceasefire agreement, the White House said in a statement. It said:
The two leaders committed to remain in close contact to ensure the deal is fully implemented and to ultimately secure the release of all hostages. 
They reiterated the importance of protecting civilian lives, respecting international humanitarian law, and increasing and sustaining humanitarian assistance to Palestinians in Gaza.
Qatar, where the political leadership of Hamas is based, played a key role in the negotiations. For more about its role check out our explainer:
 Related:  Why is Qatar often a mediator and what is its role in Israel-Hamas war?
block-time published-time 11.42pm GMT 
US President Joe Biden has said that “under no circumstances will the United States permit the forced relocation of Palestinians from Gaza or the West Bank, or the besiegement of Gaza, or the redrawing of the borders of Gaza,” in a phone call with his Egyptian counterpart Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, the White House said in another statement.  It continued:
He [Biden] also affirmed that under no circumstances can Gaza remain a sanctuary for Hamas where they can threaten Israel and Palestinians alike and imperil any pathway to a durable peace.
The President affirmed his commitment to the establishment of a Palestinian state and recognized Egypt’s essential role in setting the conditions for that outcome.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.29pm GMT 
 Ceasefire also delayed, reports say  
Multiple news media are reporting that the ceasefire will also be delayed, as well as the hostage deal.
An Israeli source told Israeli newspaper Haaretz that there would be no halt to the fighting in Gaza as long as there is no finalised timeline for the agreement with Hamas.
The BBC also reported that an Israeli government source said there would be a delay to the ceasefire, which had been expected to begin at 10am (0800GMT) on Thursday with the release of hostages expected to begin shortly after.
An Israeli official meanwhile told the news agency AFP early Thursday there would be no halt in the fighting between Israel and Hamas “before Friday”.
The reports come shortly after Israeli national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said late Wednesday that none of the hostages seized in the Hamas attacks on southern Israel on October 7 would be freed before Friday.
block-time published-time 11.12pm GMT 
US President Joe Biden “emphasized the importance of maintaining calm along the Lebanese border as well as in the West Bank”, in a phone call with Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu in which he welcomed the hostage deal, the White House has said.
In a statement , the White House said the two leaders discussed the pause in fighting, which “will allow for surging in much needed humanitarian assistance into Gaza”. It continued:
The Prime Minister thanked the President for his tireless efforts, and those of his team, to help broker this deal. The two leaders agreed that the work is not yet done and the President assured the Prime Minister that he will continue working to secure the release of all remaining hostages.
This is Helen Livingstone taking over from Léonie Chao-Fong.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.00pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 1am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
A senior Israeli official has said that the planned exchange of some Palestinians held in Israeli prisons for Israeli hostages in Hamas has been delayed until at least Friday.  In a statement released on Wednesday night, Benjamin Netanyahu’s national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said talks on the deal were continuing and that the release “will begin according to the original agreement between the parties, and not before Friday.”The first ceasefire in seven weeks of war in Gaza is due to come into effect  on Thursday morning, officials from both Hamas and Israel have said.  A four-day truce was announced early on Wednesday  after days of feverish speculation and intense negotiations. Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials. It is not thought that the reported delay  in the release of hostages will impact the ceasefire start time. The deal, struck after lengthy and complex talks mediated by Qatar , the US and Egypt, comes more than six weeks after the conflict began on 7 October, when Hamas launched attacks from Gaza into southern Israel, killing at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and taking more than 240 people hostage. The Israeli offensive has killed between 13,000 and 14,000 people, thousands of them children, according to Palestinian officials.Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has warned that “the war continues”  despite the deal for a temporary ceasefire and release of some hostages. At a briefing on Wednesday, he also said part of the deal with Hamas stipulates that representatives from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will be allowed to visit the hostages  that remain in Gaza after some of them are returned. The ICRC earlier on Wednesday said it had “not been made aware of any agreement…related to visits by the ICRC to the hostages”. A coalition of aid agencies have warned that the four-day ceasefire left almost no time to provide effective humanitarian relief to Gaza’s 2.3 million people.  In a briefing on Wednesday, they argued the only effective response  would be a permanent or durable end to the war and that it remained unclear if there would be sufficient access, particularly to the north of the strip, to allow anything beyond cursory relief.Palestinian and Israeli officials have published the names of 300 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, at least some of whom are expected to be released  in an exchange with Hamas in Gaza for dozens of Israeli hostages seized by the militant group on 7 October. An initial 10 hostages – children or elderly women – are expected to be released on Thursday morning. The families of hostages held in Gaza have said they are living in a “nightmare” as they endure an agonising wait to see if their loves ones are among those freed.  The relatives of some of the 240 hostages in Gaza have said  they were in the dark about who would be released and when. Meanwhile, excitement is also growing for Palestinians in occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank that their imprisoned loved ones may also be coming home.More than 100 Palestinians in Gaza – including 50 from one family – were reported killed on Wednesday as Israeli forces continued attacking across the strip from land, sea and air. Wafa, a Palestinian news agency, said 81 people had been killed since midnight as houses were targeted in the centre of the strip. A further 60 were believed to be dead after bombing in and around the Jabaliya refugee camp in the north.The head of the UN children’s agency (Unicef) has called the Gaza Strip “the most dangerous place in the world to be a child” and said that the temporary ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas is “far from enough”.  Catherine Russell, addressing the UN security council on Wednesday, also said that “all children inside the territory” were facing “what could soon become a catastrophic nutrition crisis”. The number of journalists killed in the Israel-Hamas conflict since 7 October has increased to at least 53, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).  The funerals were held in Beirut on Wednesday for Al Mayadeen’s reporter Farah Omar and camera operator Rabih al Mamari who were both killed by an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon on Tuesday.Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has managed to avert a wider rebellion over the Gaza deal with Hamas among his far-right coalition partners even as Itamar Ben-Gvir, the firebrand national security minister, called it immoral. Israel’s military has said  it intercepted a cruise missile near the southern port city of Eilat.  Eilat is in the south of Israel at the northern tip of the Red Sea, and has previously been targeted during the conflict both by long range fire from the Gaza Strip and by Yemen’s Houthi forces.The western powers on the UN security council face a choice of either demanding Israel lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or being complicit in Israeli war crimes and collective punishment, foreign ministers from Arab and Muslim countries said on a visit  to London on Wednesday.Pope Francis has faced criticism for allegedly drawing equivalence  between Israel and Hamas.  During a general audience after meeting with Israeli and Palestinian delegations at the Vatican, the pope reportedly remarked: “They suffer so much, I heard how they both suffer.” He went on: “Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond war: this is not war, it is terrorism.”
block-time published-time 10.53pm GMT 
 There are reports that the son of a senior Hezbollah lawmaker was killed in an Israeli strike in south Lebanon on Wednesday. 
 Abbas Raad, son of the head of Hezbollah’s parliamentary bloc Mohammed Raad,  “was killed with a number of other Hezbollah members” in an Israeli strike on a house in Beit Yahun, a source close to the family told AFP.
The official Lebanese government’s news agency reported that “an air strike launched by the Israeli enemy... on a house in Beit Yahun killed four people”, and wounded others. It did not identify the victims.
In a statement, the Israeli military said its fighter jets struck Hezbollah infrastructure in Lebanon, and that its troops and aircraft hit two cells that fired at Israeli troops or attempted to launch rockets into Israel, Haaretz reported.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.37pm GMT 
 Despite reports that the release of hostages may not happen “before Friday”, Al Jazeera is reporting that the ceasefire is still expected to begin at 10am (8am GMT) on Thursday. 
The outlet cites its correspondent as saying:
The Israeli media is reporting that there was some sort of delay, but they did not elaborate on the discussions, neither did the national security adviser. But we do know that this deal has passed, it will go through, there will be that tentative temporary ceasefire that will start around 10am tomorrow, local time.
block-time published-time 10.11pm GMT 
 The latest remarks by  Israel’s national security council chair Tzachi Hanegbi indicate that the release of some hostages held in Gaza in exchange for Palestinians held in Israeli prisons has been delayed. 
In the statement, Hanegbi said that contacts on the deal were continuing, and that the release of hostages will begin “not before Friday”. He did not give an explanation for the delay.
An Israeli political source told Haaretz that the delay is because Hamas has not yet submitted the list of Israeli nationals it intends to release. The source also said that Hamas has not ratified the ceasefire agreement with Qatar, which is supposed to guarantee all sides abide by the agreed terms.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.02pm GMT 
 No hostages to be released before Friday, says senior Israeli official  
A senior Israeli official has said that the planned exchange of some Palestinians held in Israeli prisons for Israeli hostages in Hamas has been delayed until at least Friday.
In a statement, Benjamin Netanyahu’s national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi said:
The release will begin according to the original agreement between the parties, and not before Friday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.28pm GMT 
 UN humanitarian chief says he hopes pause in hostilities will lead to longer-term ceasefire  
The UN humanitarian chief, Martin Griffiths, has welcomed the agreement of a deal between Israel and Hamas.
Posting to social media, Griffiths said he hoped the agreement will bring some respite to the people of Gaza and Israel, and that it will allow grieving families to honour their dead and bury them.
He said he looked forward to the implementation of the humanitarian pause and “hopes it leads to a longer-term humanitarian ceasefire”, adding:
Humanitarian agencies are mobilised and ready to increase the volume of aid brought into Gaza and distributed across the Strip.
enltrI welcome the agreement reached by Israel and Hamas. I hope it brings some respite to the people of Gaza and Israel. Humanitarian agencies are mobilized and ready to increase the volume of aid brought into Gaza and distributed across the Strip. pic.twitter.com/96AuubWDJY
 — Martin Griffiths (@UNReliefChief) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.17pm GMT 
 US officials have a “working list” of 10 hostages that they believe are likely to be released from Gaza on Thursday, according to a report. 
A source familiar with how hostages are expected to leave Gaza told  CNN that the first swap is expected to take place at 10am local time (8am GMT) tomorrow.
Fifty Israeli hostages, including some with dual nationalities, are expected to be released over the four-day pause in hostilities with a minimum of 10 hostages to be released each day.
Each day, a group of hostages to be released would be handed off to the Red Cross, who will then take the group to a designated border point that will largely depend on the location of those hostages, the source said. Many of the first 50 hostages are expected to come out through Egypt, they said.
Every evening before the next day’s release, Israel and Hamas will give the Red Cross the list of hostage and prisoner names being released, they said. Hostages will be brought by the Red Cross to Rafah where they will be met by Israeli soldiers, who will verify that the hostages released are on the list. 
The hostages will then be taken by helicopter to several designated hospitals in Israel, where their families will finally be able to see them in special areas that are closed to the public, the source said.
The first two days of the hostage release will be treated as a “testing period”, after which there is expected to be intense discussions about the potential second phase of the hostage release, they said, adding:
The first swap is the most crucial to see that the mechanism is working as was agreed.
block-time published-time 9.04pm GMT 
 Netanyahu says Red Cross will be able to visit remaining hostages held in Gaza  
 Benjamin Netanyahu, speaking at the press conference just earlier, said part of the hostage deal with Hamas stipulates that representatives from the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) will be allowed to visit the hostages that remain in Gaza after some of them are returned. He said:
I expect the Red Cross to do its job, and to visit them all and to bring them the medication that they need.
The Israeli prime minister then read out loud verbatim the clause in Hebrew. The Times of Israel reported that the document he appeared to be reading from has not been published.
Netanyahu’s office claimed on Tuesday night that Israel had successfully negotiated the inclusion of a clause in the hostage deal for the ICRC to visit all the Gaza hostages who remain in Gaza after the deal.
But the Red Cross issued a statement on Wednesday morning saying it has not been updated about the plans, which directly involve its staff. The ICRC said:
Since October 7, 2023, the ICRC has continuously asked for the release of all hostages held in Gaza and their humane treatment. We haven’t stopped doing so and will continue as long as it takes.
Thus far, the ICRC has not been made aware of any agreement reached by both parties related to visits by the ICRC to the hostages. Should visits be agreed upon, the ICRC stands ready to visit. The ICRC does not take part in the negotiations between the parties to the conflict.
block-time published-time 8.53pm GMT 
     Picture taken from Rafah, showing a ball of fire lighting the sky during an Israeli strike on eastern Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.47pm GMT 
 Israel’s supreme court has rejected a legal challenge to the hostage and ceasefire deal filed earlier today  by the Almagor Terror Victims Association. 
In its petition, the group requested that the court order the government to demonstrate that the deal does not endanger Israeli lives, and that having some but not all hostages released violated the right to equality, the Times of Israel reported.
But in a unanimous decision, the court ruled that only the government has the authority to make such agreements and that the court cannot intervene.
The decision paves the way for the exchange deal to go ahead starting tomorrow morning. Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza. 
There will be a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza, with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. According to a Hamas statement, Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the truce.
The deal includes a clause stipulating that for every 10 hostages that come home safely, there will be an additional day in which fighting is paused, up to a total of 10 days, and three times as many Palestinians in Israeli jails released.
block-time published-time 8.20pm GMT 
 The Israeli prime minister moved to his next point after talking directly about the hostages, saying that he and his cabinet have “very clearly” outlined the key objectives of the war against Hamas, declared after  thye broke into southern Israel from Gaza on 7 October   and slaughtered civilians. 
“Eliminating Hamas, liberating our captives and making sure that post-Hamas there will be no threat to Israel,” Benjamin Netanyahu said at a press conference in Tel Aviv moments ago.
He said that the path to get the deal to release at least 50 of the estimated 240 hostages, mostly Israeli civilians was paved by the Israeli “military pressure against Hamas” and, second, political pressure.
“We were engaged in very tough negotiations in order to improve the conditions of this agreement,” he said.
He continued: “I just spoke to [US] President Biden and thanked him for responding to my request to work with the negotiators in order to improve the conditions of this agreement which eventually happened,” he said.
 Joe Biden had already thanked the Qataris for mediating negotiations between Israel and Hamas, Reuters and this blog reported. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.10pm GMT 
 Benjamin Netanyahu, prime minister of Israel, further said at a press conference in Tel Aviv, where he just finished speaking, that last night his cabinet met to approve what he called  phase  one of the deal to see Israeli captives released by Hamas from Gaza. 
“Since the beginning of the war I never stopped thinking about them, I never stopped thinking about you, their families. I heard from you about this constant terror that you are living [in],” he said.
He said that when he met with hostages’ loved ones they were holding pictures of their captive relatives close to their hearts. “We looked at every one of them,” he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.02pm GMT 
 'The war continues,' Netanyahu says  
 Benjamin Netanyahu has warned that the war against Palestinian militant group Hamas goes on, despite a deal for a brief ceasefire and the release of some hostages taken in the murderous raid on southern Israel on 7 October.
“The war continues,” said the Israeli prime minister at a press conference now airing live on TV.
“We continue until we have achieved complete victory,” he said.
He has thanked allies for helping negotiate the deal with Hamas for the release of dozens of hostages from Gaza, in exchange for Palestinian prisoners held by Israel.
But he said Israel would not stop battling until all hostages are brought out of Gaza.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.57pm GMT 
 Netanyahu holds press conference about hostage deal  
 Benjamin Netanyahu  is speaking now live on TV at a press conference to talk about the deal to agree to a temporary ceasefire with Hamas and a deal to release some hostages held in Gaza.
The Israeli prime minister said he has just talked to Joe Biden, the US president, on the phone, thanking him.
Netanyahu said he is still working to get an agreement to release “all, and I mean all” hostages of the estimated 240 held by Hamas.
Initially, perhaps 50 are expected to be released, in exchange for Palestinian prisoners held by Israel.
The prime minster said that in speaking to families of hostages “I heard about the constant fear … the constant terror, the suffering and … anxiety,” he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.10pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s just past 9pm in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
The first ceasefire in seven weeks of war in Gaza is due to come into effect  on Thursday morning, officials from both Hamas and Israel have said.  A four-day truce was announced early on Wednesday  after days of feverish speculation and intense negotiations. Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.A coalition of aid agencies have warned that the four-day ceasefire left almost no time to provide effective humanitarian relief to Gaza’s 2.3 million people.  In a briefing on Wednesday, they argued the only effective response  would be a permanent or durable end to the war and that it remained unclear if there would be sufficient access, particularly to the north of the strip, to allow anything beyond cursory relief.Palestinian and Israeli officials have published the names of 300 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, at least some of whom are expected to be released  in an exchange with Hamas in Gaza for dozens of Israeli hostages seized by the militant group on 7 October. An initial 10 hostages – children or elderly women – are expected to be released on Thursday morning.The head of Israel’s Mossad intelligence agency, David Barnea, has arrived in Doha to meet with Qatar’s prime minister, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani, to discuss the final details of the hostage deal, according to reports.  Barnea’s trip to Qatar signals there are some details that Israel wants to finalise in the deal.The families of hostages held in Gaza have said they are living in a “nightmare” as they endure an agonising wait to see if their loves ones are among those freed.  The relatives of some of the 240 hostages in Gaza have said  they were in the dark about who would be released and when.More than 100 Palestinians in Gaza – including 50 from one family – were reported killed on Wednesday as Israeli forces continued attacking across the strip from land, sea and air. Wafa, a Palestinian news agency, said 81 people had been killed since midnight as houses were targeted in the centre of the strip. A further 60 were believed to be dead after bombing in and around the Jabaliya refugee camp in the north.The head of the UN children’s agency (Unicef) has called the Gaza Strip “the most dangerous place in the world to be a child” and said that the temporary ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas is “far from enough”.  Catherine Russell, addressing the UN security council on Wednesday, also said that “all children inside the territory” were facing “what could soon become a catastrophic nutrition crisis”. The number of journalists killed in the Israel-Hamas conflict since 7 October has increased to at least 53, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).  The funerals were held in Beirut on Wednesday for Al Mayadeen’s reporter Farah Omar and camera operator Rabih al Mamari who were both killed by an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon on Tuesday.Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has managed to avert a wider rebellion over the Gaza deal with Hamas among his far-right coalition partners even as Itamar Ben-Gvir, the firebrand national security minister, called it immoral. Israel’s military has said  it intercepted a cruise missile near the southern port city of Eilat.  Eilat is in the south of Israel at the northern tip of the Red Sea, and has previously been targeted during the conflict both by long range fire from the Gaza Strip and by Yemen’s Houthi forces.Pope Francis has faced criticism for allegedly drawing equivalence  between Israel and Hamas.  During a general audience after meeting with Israeli and Palestinian delegations at the Vatican, the pope reportedly remarked: “They suffer so much, I heard how they both suffer.” He went on: “Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond war: this is not war, it is terrorism.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.58pm GMT 
The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) have said that an evacuation convoy for the wounded and patients from al-Shifa hospital has been stranded for five hours at a checkpoint separating northern Gaza from the south.
In a social media post, the PRCS said Israeli forces were “putting the lives of the wounded and patients at risk” by obstructing its passage.
enltr??Five hours have passed, and the evacuation convoy for the wounded and patients from Al-Shifa Hospital is still stranded at the checkpoint separating North and South Gaza. Occupation forces obstruct its passage, conducting thorough inspections of ambulances, putting the lives of…
— PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 6.47pm GMT 
Here are some images taken by Reuters photographer Ronen Zvulun, who visited northern Gaza with the Israel Defence Forces (IDF).
Editor’s note by Reuters: Reuters photographs were reviewed by the IDF as part of the conditions of the embed. No photos were removed.
    An Israeli soldier sits in a HMMWV (Humvee) in the northern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters      Palestinians waiting before leaving northern Gaza. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters      Israeli soldiers stand near the opening to a tunnel at al-Shifa hospital compound in Gaza City. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters      An Israeli tank in the northern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters      Palestinian children look out of a window at al-Shifa hospital compound in Gaza City. Photograph: Ronen Zvulun/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.54pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.24pm GMT 
 A New York political lobbying firm has offered to represent a halal street food vendor who was recently subjected to a sustained racist attack by one of its own consultants, a former state department official, in the latest encounter reflecting tension in the city over the Israel-Hamas conflict. 
The Manhattan-based Gotham Government Relations firm said on Tuesday that it would cut all ties with Stuart Seldowitz, who worked in the US Department of State’s Office of Israel and Palestinian Affairs from 1999 to 2003 and later at the national security council during the Obama administration, after he was filmed harassing an Upper East Side street vendor.
In one widely shared video , Seldowitz is heard to ask the unidentified vendor: “Did you rape your daughter like Muhammad did?” In another, he states  : “If we killed 4,000 Palestinian kids, you know what? It wasn’t enough. It wasn’t enough.”
When the vendor says he doesn’t speak English, Seldowitz laughs and says, “That’s why you’re selling food in a food cart, because you’re ignorant,” before suggesting that the vendor will be deported to Egypt and tortured by intelligence agents.
“The mukhabarat in Egypt will get your parents,” Seldowitz said in the video. “Does your father like his fingernails? They will take them out one by one.”
The vendor is heard asking Seldowitz to “please go” and saying that he would call the police.
An NYPD spokesperson told the outlet that they are aware of the videos and monitoring the situation but that no reports had been filed. The woman who posted the videos , who is believed to be a social activist and Columbia University graduate, said Seldowitz had been harassing the vendor for weeks.
block-time published-time 6.16pm GMT 
 The Swiss government has announced that it will bring foward a draft law that explicitly bans Hamas “activities” or support for the group in Switzerland. 
In a statement, the government said the drafting of the law would be “the most appropriate response to the situation that has prevailed in the Middle East” since the Hamas terror attacks on Israel on 7 October. The statement continued:
The act will provide the federal authorities with the necessary tools to counter any Hamas activities or support for the organisation in Switzerland.
“The ban has the sole aim of preventing the terrorist activities of this organisation, and the people who support them,” the justice minister, Elisabeth Baume-Schneider, told a press conference on Wednesday, AFP reported.
She said banning Hamas would make it easier to expel “dangerous people” and speed up criminal proceedings against “potential terrorists”.
The seven-member Swiss government is formed by ministers from the four biggest parties, and lawmakers in parliament are likely to back the draft law. 
The hard-right Swiss People’s Party, the biggest in the country, has been strongly advocating for a ban.
block-time published-time 6.05pm GMT 
 The families of hostages held in Gaza have said they are living in a “nightmare” as they endure an agonising wait to see if their loves ones are among those freed. 
The relatives of some of the 240 hostages in Gaza have said they are grappling with feeling both optimistic about the deal, and fearful that their loved ones may be left behind. The families said they were in the dark about who would be released and when.
Keren Schem said she feared the deal might collapse but that she was praying for the release of her daughter, Mia Schem, 21, who was abducted from the Supernova music festival. “It’s like Russian roulette. We don’t know who’s going to come out,” Schem, 51, said. 
They’re talking about children and their mothers so I don’t think that Mia will come out today or tomorrow or even the day after. But I’m praying that she will because nobody really knows.
     Ofri Bibas Levy, sister of Yarden, holds up a picture of Yarden’s child Kfir, who at nine months old is believed to be the youngest of the hostages. Photograph: Salvatore Di Nolfi/AP   
Eylon Keshet said he was afraid that his cousin, Yarden Bibas, 34, would be split from his wife, Shiri, 32 and their two boys, Ariel, four, and nine-month-old Kfir, who is thought to be the youngest hostage. Keshet said:
I’m afraid that this is what it means, but, unfortunately, I’m not optimistic from the very beginning that Yarden was held together with them because he was kidnapped separately from them and I don’t think Hamas cares much to reunite families.
Read the full story here.
 Related:  Families of hostages in Gaza wait to see if relatives among those freed
block-time published-time 5.49pm GMT 
 Images  from the newswires show preparation is under way for humanitarian aid and fuel to enter Gaza through the Rafah crossing from Egypt following the announcement of a temporary ceasefire between Israel and Hamas. 
During the four-day pause in hostilities, aid and fuel is expected to reach the besieged Gaza Strip. Many of territory’s 2.3 million people have been displaced from their homes, and more than 14,000 of them have been killed, according to Palestinian officials.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
    Trucks carrying aid await an opportunity to enter Gaza via the Rafah crossing in Arish, Egypt. Photograph: Ali Moustafa/Getty Images      Aid organised by the Egyptian Red Crescent is prepared in Arish, Egypt. Photograph: Ali Moustafa/Getty Images      A truck carrying humanitarian aid from the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA) arrives at the Egyptian side of the Rafah border crossing with the Gaza Strip. Photograph: Khaled Desouki/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.35pm GMT 
 Officials list 300 Palestinians to be freed under hostage deal  
Palestinian and Israeli officials have published the names of 300 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, at least some of whom are expected to be released in an exchange with Hamas in Gaza for dozens of Israeli hostages seized by the militant group on 7 October.
An initial 10 hostages – children or elderly women – are expected to be released on Thursday morning. While details are still unclear, a source at the West-Bank based Palestinian Authority told the Guardian  that it is thought that 50 Palestinian women and children will then be dropped off at the Betunia checkpoint, near Ramallah, on Thursday afternoon.
As the families of abducted Israelis  endure an agonising wait to see if their loved ones will be able to return, excitement is also growing for Palestinians in occupied East Jerusalem and the West Bank that their imprisoned loved ones will also be coming home.
 Aseel Osama Shadeh, 17, was arrested earlier this month after carrying a Hamas flag to a protest at the notorious Qalandia checkpoint between Ramallah and Jeruaslem – an offence under Israeli law.
According to the Palestinian Prisoners Society, 7,200 prisoners are currently being held by Israel, among them 88 women and 250 children 17 and under. The plight of prisoners is a key issue for Palestinians: at least four in 10 Palestinian men spend at least some time in their life in Israeli prisons.
The hostage swap deal has also shone a light on Israeli detention and sentencing practices in the Palestinian territories , where Palestinians are tried in military courts and minors are regularly imprisoned.
All but four on the list of 300 are from the West Bank and Jerusalem. Israel refused to release anyone sentenced for murder; most are held for stone throwing, damaging property, having contact with “hostile” organisations, as well as more serious charges including attempted stabbings and making explosives.
Many are held in administrative detention , which allows for pre-emptive arrest, on secret evidence, and six-month-long extendable stints in prison without charge or trial.
block-time published-time 5.24pm GMT 
 Pope Francis has faced criticism for allegedly drawing equivalence between Israel and Hamas. 
During a general audience after meeting with Israeli and Palestinian delegations at the Vatican, the pope reportedly remarked, “They suffer so much, I heard how they both suffer.” 
This statement referred to testimonies brought by the Israeli group, who shared their experiences of having relatives taken hostage by Hamas during the 7 October attacks, as well as the Palestinians with family members living in the targeted enclave.
Continuing his remarks, Pope Francis stated:
Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond war: this is not war, it is terrorism.
In response, members of the Israeli delegation expressed their discontent, citing that there could be no comparison between Hamas, an organisation that employs civilians as shields, and Israel, which defends civilians.
    Pope Francis meets a delegation of Israelis who have relatives held hostage in Gaza at the studio of Santa Marta in Vatican City. Photograph: Vatican Pool/Getty Images   
 Noemi Di Segni, the president of the Union of Italian Jewish Communities, also criticised Pope Francis for placing everyone on the same level in terms of responsibility. According to Di Segni, the starting point should be recognised as the terrorism employed in a plan to exterminate Jews worldwide, while war is necessary for the defense of Israel and its people. Di Segni stressed that while there is suffering involved, the blame should be attributed to those truly responsible.
Meanwhile, Vatican spokesperson Matteo Bruni addressed claims made by the Palestinian delegation during a press conference in Rome. They asserted that the Pope had recognised the ongoing “genocide” faced by the Palestinian people in their meeting. Bruni, however, refuted this claim, stating that he was not aware of the pope using such terminology. He clarified that the pope’s words during the general audience represented the dire situation experienced in Gaza.
The Palestinian delegation also invited the pope to visit Gaza, suggesting that his presence could help stop the war. In response, Pope Francis mentioned that it could be considered when circumstances permit.
    Pope Francis meets a delegation of families of Palestinians in Gaza at the studio of Paul VI Hall in Vatican City. Photograph: Vatican Pool/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 5.17pm GMT 
 Four-day ceasefire leaves no time to meet Gaza's needs, warn aid agencies  
A coalition of aid agencies warned in a briefing that the four day ceasefire announced by the warring parties left almost no time to provide effective humanitarian relief to Gaza’s 2.3 million people.
They argued the only effective response would be a permanent or durable end to the war and that it remained unclear if there would be sufficient access, particularly to the north of the strip, to allow anything beyond cursory relief.
Joel Weiler, executive director of medical charity Médecins du Monde, said “for a medical organisation, four days of pause is....band aid, not health care”, arguing it would be insufficient to time to diagnose and begin treating serious injuries or other medical conditions.
Danila Zizi, Palestine director from Humanity & Inclusion, an aid organisation, said “it’s a kind of drop in the ocean if we don’t have fuel and we don’t have access” and complained that it was unclear what the arrangements were likely to be.
It is estimated 1.7 million people out of 2.3 million have been displaced by the conflict, many of whom are living in tents in the south of the strip, just as the weather is deteriorating. But there remain 200,000 to 300,000 civilians still in northern Gaza despite weeks of fighting.
Agencies present complained that there was no sign of other border crossings being reopened during the four day pause in fighting, leaving aid only able to pass through the crowded Rafah facility, in the south of the strip, where it meets Egypt.
“There is a logistic limitation into what can enter through the crossing,” at Rafah, said Chiara Saccardi, head of Middle East operations with ActionAid. 
If you consider that in some of the shelters so you have 20,000 people sheltering and they have available one latrine for 650 persons, then you can only figure what is needed on the ground right now.
Only a long term ceasefire and security for aid workers could begin to meet some of the people’s urgent needs, she added.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.09pm GMT 
 The head of the UN children’s agency (Unicef), Catherine Russell, welcomed the deal agreed by Israel and Hamas for the release of hostages and a temporary ceasefire but said “much more needs to be done”. 
Speaking to the UN security council on Wednesday, Russell said:
For children to survive, for humanitarian workers to stay and effectively deliver, humanitarian pauses are simply not enough. Unicef is calling for an urgent humanitarian ceasefire to immediately put a stop to this carnage.
She said she was concerned that further military escalation in the south of Gaza would “exponentially worsen” the humanitarian situation there, and said attacks on the south “must be avoided”. She added:
The true cost of this latest war in Palestine and Israel will be measured in children’s lives – those lost to the violence and those forever changed by it. Without an end to the fighting and full humanitarian access, the cost will continue to grow exponentially.
block-time published-time 5.01pm GMT 
 Temporary ceasefire in Gaza to come into effect on Thursday morning, say Hamas and Israel officials  
The first ceasefire in seven weeks of war in Gaza is due to come into effect on Thursday morning, officials from both Hamas and Israel have said.
The four-day truce, announced early this morning,  is slated to begin at 10am local time (08:00 GMT) on Thursday, an Israeli official told  CNN today.
Senior Hamas official Moussa Abu Marzouk also told  Al Jazeera that the temporary cease-fire will start at 10am local time. Marzouk said the pause in fighting would cover “all regions the of Gaza Strip”, adding that “there will be no warplanes or air traffic in Gaza from 10am to 4pm”.
An Egyptian security source told Reuters that mediators wanted a start time of 10am on Thursday, with Hamas seeking a few hours from the start to begin freeing hostages.
Under the agreement, Hamas will free at least 50 of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages  they took on 7 October. In turn, Israel will release at least 150 Palestinian prisoners and allow up to 300 trucks of humanitarian aid into Gaza after more than six weeks of bombardment, heavy fighting and a crippling blockade of fuel, food, medicine and other essentials.
There will be a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza, with air activity over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. According to a Hamas statement, Israel has agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the temporary truce.
block-time published-time 4.46pm GMT 
Unicef’s executive director, Catherine Russell, who visited southern Gaza last week, said she was “haunted by what I saw and heard” as she met with Palestinian children, families and Unicef staff on the ground.
She recounted seeing “tiny babies clinging to life in incubators” while visiting the Nasser hospital in Khan  Younis, while “doctors worried how they could keep the machines running without fuel.”
“In addition to bombs, rockets, and gunfire, Gaza’s children are at extreme risk from catastrophic living conditions,” she said, adding that “all children inside the territory” were facing “what could soon become a catastrophic nutrition crisis”.
Russell said that water production capacity in Gaza had plummeted to just 5% of its normal output, with families and children relying on three litres or less of water per person per day for drinking, cooking, and hygiene.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.41pm GMT 
 Gaza Strip is 'world's most dangerous place' for children, says UN agency  
The head of the UN children’s agency (Unicef) has called the Gaza Strip “the most dangerous place in the world to be a child” and said that the temporary ceasefire agreement between Israel and Hamas is “far from enough”.
Unicef’s executive director, Catherine Russell, addressing the UN security council on Wednesday,  said more than 5,300 Palestinian children have been reportedly killed in Gaza in just 46 days of war, adding:
That is over 115 a day, every day, for weeks and weeks. Based on these figures, children account for 40% of the deaths in Gaza. This is unprecedented. In other words, today, the Gaza Strip is the most dangerous place in the world to be a child.
The UN agency has received reports that more than 1,200 Palestinian children remain under the rubble of bombed-out buildings or are otherwise unaccounted for, she added.
For the children who manage to survive the war, they are “likely to see their lives irrevocably altered through repeated exposure to traumatic events”, Russell said.
She said she was particularly concerned by reports of increasing numbers of displaced children who have been separated from their families as they fled south, or who have arrived unaccompanied to hospitals for medical care.
These children are especially vulnerable, and they urgently need to be identified, provided with temporary care, and given access to family tracing and reunification services.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.15pm GMT 
 Reactions among leading Israeli columnists on Wednesday reflected the continuing political problems that Benjamin Netanyahu is facing even as he tries to sell the deal. 
 Nahum Barnea, a journalist for the Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper, suggested that “Israel has no choice but to pay the price” while linking the agreement with the failures of 7 October.
The alternative to forsaking the hostages a second time, after they were first forsaken on October, would have been far worse and far more dangerous. Beyond the price it could end up costing in blood and lives, it would have left an indelible stain on the Israeli government and the IDF.
Others were more damning still. Also writing in Yedioth, Yossi Yehoshua warned that Israel risked missing “an historic opportunity to fundamentally change the Gaza problem, and will not only pay for that in soldiers’ lives but by missing out on a better deal”, adding “we are jeopardising our most important war in recent decades. One man has to own all of this: Binyamin Netanyahu.”
    The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, speaks at a press conference in Tel Aviv Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock   
On Kan Radio, Gadi Shamni, a former senior military officer, said:
I’m not sure that Netanyahu wants to win this war. This floundering might work for him.
Netanyahu already realises that he is going to be remembered in infamy as the man who with his own two hands moulded this crisis. The prime minister delayed the IDF [ground] manoeuvre for weeks – he didn’t believe in the IDF’s capabilities, and he chose to waste his time.
What Netanyahu wants, first of all, first and foremost, is to minimise the damage to himself.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.05pm GMT 
 The support from Bezalel Smotrich, the finance minister, and his Religious Zionist party represented a victory for Benjamin Netanyahu and his senior allies. 
Support for the hostage deal appears to have been clinched with the decision by Yoav Gallant, the defence minister, and by senior officials in the Israel Defense Forces and Shin Bet domestic intelligence agency to back it, even if it meant slowing the pace of the offensive.
Talks around the truce in exchange for the release of hostages have seen Netayahu and his cabinet attempt to balance two competing concerns.
On one hand, support for an arrangement to release those held captive by Hamas and other armed Palestinian factions in Gaza enjoys widespread public support, much of which has been galvanised by the campaign waged by the families of the hostages.
On the other hand, however, has been the concern that an agreement for a substantial ceasefire could mark the beginning of the end of Israel’s war against Hamas, a concern dismissed by Netanyahu as “nonsense”.
Justifying his support for a deal he had previously rejected, Netanyahu said: 
Let me make clear: we are at war, and we will continue the war until we achieve all our objectives – eradicating Hamas, bringing back all our hostages and MIAs, and guaranteeing that there will be no figure in Gaza that threatens Israel.
 Isaac Herzog, Israel’s president, however, acknowledged that the deal – while moral – would inspire “understandable, painful and difficult misgivings”.
It is a moral and ethical duty that correctly expresses the Jewish and Israeli value of redeeming captives, and I hope that it will be a significant first step for bringing all the captives home.
block-time published-time 3.56pm GMT 
 Benjamin Netanyahu has managed to avert a wider rebellion over the Gaza deal with Hamas among his far-right coalition partners even as Itamar Ben-Gvir, the firebrand national security minister, called it immoral. 
Three ministers, all from Ben-Gvir’s far-right Jewish Power party, oppose the deal but members of the equally hardline Religious Zionist party were persuaded to support the deal after heated exchanges in an Israeli cabinet meeting late on Tuesday night.
    Itamar Ben-Gvir, Israel’s national security minister, has been critical of the deal with Hamas. Photograph: Ammar Awad/Reuters   
The deal was made after weeks in which Netanyahu had been vocal in his opposition to any pause in Israel’s military offensive against Hamas in Gaza, but there has also been mounting political pressure on the prime minister, who has seen his support among voters collapse since the 7 October massacre by Hamas.
But amid warning signs of political difficulties for Netanyhu, who depends on support from far-right parties to remain in power, Ben-Gvir heavily criticised the deal on Wednesday. “We don’t have the right to agree to separating them and only some of them returning,” he said. “And we definitely cannot accept an outline that sees the release of female and underage terrorists when we don’t get back everyone”, adding that the ceasefire benefited Hamas.
Leaks from the cabinet meeting suggested that Ben-Gvir had also said that the decision to back the deal threatened “generational damage that will come back to hurt us badly”.
block-time published-time 3.40pm GMT 
 The head of Israel’s Mossad intelligence agency, David Barnea, has arrived in Doha to meet with Qatar’s prime minister, Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani, to discuss the final details of the hostage deal,  according to reports.
Barnea’s trip to Qatar signals there are some details that Israel wants to finalise in the deal, including how it will be implemented on the ground and the exact time the pause in the fighting will begin, Axios reported.  Barnea was the lead negotiator on the Israeli side.
The report cites Israeli and US official as warning that the next 24 hours will be “highly sensitive” and that “a lot can still go wrong”.
There are multiple reports that the pause in fighting will come into effect at 10am local time (08:00 GMT) on Thursday, but an Israeli official told the outlet that the time will be determined this evening.
block-time published-time 3.23pm GMT 
 In the occupied West Bank, people attended the funerals of six Palestinians who were killed in a Israeli raid  on Wednesday, according to the Palestinian Authority’s health ministry. 
The Palestine Red Crescent Society said the Israeli army stormed the refugee camp in the northern city of Tulkarm and briefly detained a 16-year-old with shrapnel wounds to his face.
A 26-year-old young woman “beaten by the Israeli army” had been transferred to hospital, the Red Crescent added.
Meanwhile, a Palestinian was killed by Israeli forces near the city of Qalqilia, the official Palestinian news agency, Wafa, reported.
    People attend the funeral ceremony of Palestinians who died during the Israeli attacks in Tulkarm, West Bank. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images      Palestinians attend funerals of those killed in Tulkarm, West Bank. Photograph: Majdi Mohammed/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.57pm GMT 
 The British father of 12-year-old twins who were killed during the 7 October Hamas attack inside Israel has spoken of his loss, saying the “unfathomable, unimaginable, unspeakable has happened to my gorgeous children”. 
His son and daughter Yannai and Liel Hetzroni-Heller were killed at kibbutz Be’eri, where survivors described the Hamas assault as a pogrom. 
In a statement issued in London via the police, PA Media reports Gavin Heller said:
I am utterly devastated by the news of my children’s deaths in Israel; it has broken me.
Yannai and Liel had their entire lives ahead of them, but they were cruelly and brutally murdered on that fateful 7 October. My life will never be the same.
There are no words that can ever or will ever explain this pain and brutality. The unfathomable, unimaginable, unspeakable has happened to my gorgeous children, and the world has turned against humanity.
There’s, for certain, no worse way to leave this world than to be violently murdered by a terrorist; all because they were Jewish.
Liel wasn’t even buried as there weren’t enough fragments of her. Her toys were buried instead of her body. Too few moments were shared with them and I cannot believe this is how their story ends.
May they both be at peace, together in heaven. All we can do now is pray that the world comes to its senses and understands that ‘never again’ is now.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.49pm GMT 
 Israel claims to have intercepted a cruise missile near Eilat  
 Israel’s military has posted to social media to claim that it has intercepted a cruise missile near the southern port city of Eilat. 
In a message on the Telegram app and other social media channels, it wrote:
Following the report regarding an infiltration of a hostile aircraft in the area of the city of Eilat, an IAF fighter jet successfully intercepted a cruise missile that was launched toward Israel. No infiltration into Israeli territory was identified.
Eilat is in the south of Israel at the northern tip of the Red Sea, and has previously been targeted during the conflict both by long range fire from the Gaza Strip and by Yemen’s Houthi forces
block-time published-time 2.21pm GMT 
 US official confirms it will be pausing some surveillance drone flights over Gaza as part of Israel-Hamas deal  
 CNN has reported that  the US and Israel will pause drone flights over Gaza for six hours each day during the temporary truce. 
Deputy national security adviser Jon Finer gave the information to CNN, which reported:
The US military currently flies surveillance drones over Gaza to support Israel in its efforts to find the hostages. US officials have previously said that the American intelligence being gathered is not used for lethal operations. While the pause in Israeli drone flights had been previously reported, Finer’s comments are the first official confirmation that the US will also be taking part in the pause.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.16pm GMT 
 Al Jazeera has issued a statement strongly condemning what it says is “the horrific targeting of journalists” by Israel during the current conflict. 
Writing that “the number of those deliberately targeted and killed in Gaza has now reached 60 journalists and photographers since 7 October”, the statement goes on to call on the international community to act:
Al Jazeera Media Network calls on international press freedom and Human Rights organisations to take the necessary measures to ensure the protection of journalists, enabling them to carry out their profession and urges them to condemn the systemic killing of journalists by Israeli forces.
Journalists in Gaza are making unparalleled sacrifices to reveal the true cost of the Israeli onslaught. Al Jazeera stands firm in its call for justice, accountability, and the safeguarding of the fundamental rights of journalists in conflict zones.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.13pm GMT 
 The Swiss government said on Wednesday that it has decided to propose a ban on Hamas. 
Reuters reports that it said in a statement it was “the most appropriate response to the situation that has prevailed in the Middle East since 7 October”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.11pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
It has just gone 4pm in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the headlines:
Fifty women and children held hostage by Hamas and other groups in Gaza since 7 October are to be released in exchange for a four-day ceasefire in a deal brokered by Qatar with the support of the US.  According to Hamas, Israel will release 150 Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails and allow hundreds of aid trucks a day to cross the Rafah border with Egypt, providing humanitarian supplies to Palestinians in Gaza.Over a hundred Palestinians in Gaza were reported killed on Wednesday as Israeli forces continued attacking across the strip from land, sea and air ahead of the temporary truce.  Lt Col Richard Hecht, the IDF’s international spokesperson, told a briefing: “We still have probably, maybe a day-plus before this thing matures, and things can happen in that day. And I assume today is going to be a day of fighting in Gaza.”The agreement pauses a war that has lasted more than six weeks so far. It has cost the lives of at least 14,000 Palestinians in Gaza, according to the government media office in Gaza, and more than 1,200 people in Israel, most of whom were victims of the surprise Hamas cross-border attack on 7 October. Unconfirmed media reports have suggested a ceasefire might start at 10am Thursday (8am GMT). The casualty figures issued during the conflict have not been independently verified by journalists.The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the hostage deal was “the result of tireless diplomacy and relentless effort across the department and broader US government”. “While this deal marks significant progress, we will not rest as long as Hamas continues to hold hostages in Gaza,” Blinken said.Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, Iran ’s foreign minister, is to make a regional tour following the announcement of the deal.Israel’s military on Wednesday claimed that during its campaign in Gaza it has “exposed and destroyed approximately 400 terror tunnel shafts”. It said “Hamas has embedded its network of terrorist tunnels below population centres across the Gaza Strip. Many of the shafts leading to its tunnel network are located within civilian hospitals, schools and homes”. The claims have not been independently verified.The Palestine Red Crescent Society said it had sent 14 ambulances to evacuate patients from al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza.The number of journalists killed in the Israel-Hamas conflict since 7 October has increased to at least 53, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ).  The funerals were held in Beirut Wednesday for Al Mayadeen’s reporter Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih al Mamari who were both killed by an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon on Tuesday.Six Palestinians were shot dead in an Israeli raid in the northern city of Tulkarm in the occupied West Bank on Wednesday, the Palestinian Authority’s health ministry said.Syria ’s army said on Wednesday that Israel launched aerial strikes on outposts in the vicinity of Damascus but that nobody was injured or killed.Jordan ’s King Abdullah is going to Cairo today for talks with the Egypt’s president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, on how to end “Israel’s aggression against the Palestinians”, a palace statement said.The EU’s foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, said he has been told by the Palestinian Authority that 40% of housing has been demolished in Gaza.Pope Francis on Wednesday met separately with relatives of Israeli hostages in Gaza and of Palestinian prisoners in Israel, saying both sides “suffer so much”. In comments likely to cause controversy, he said “Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond wars. This is not war, this is terrorism”, without elaborating on what he was referring to as terrorism.France ’s foreign minister, Catherine Colonna, has been critical of Israel, saying that there are too many civilian deaths in the conflict, adding this is “unworthy of a democracy”.Jeremy Hunt,  the chancellor of the UK, has announced additional funds to combat antisemitism domestically.
block-time published-time 1.56pm GMT 
In the UK parliament in London earlier today the Palestine Solidarity Campaign staged a sit-in in support of a ceasefire in Gaza.
enltr??HAPPENING NOW - PSC is holding a sit-in at UK Parliament. Earlier today a temporary truce was called. Whilst it is welcome it is not a solution. We won’t stray from our demands. We demand a permanent #CeasefireNOW  and an end to the siege of Gaza and Israeli Apartheid. pic.twitter.com/iUt2aJ6lbh
 — PSC (@PSCupdates) November 22, 2023
The UK government has, since 7 October, consistently called for “humanitarian pauses” in the conflict, rather than a ceasefire.
block-time published-time 1.53pm GMT 
 A Palestinian official has suggested to Reuters that the proposed swap of 50 Israeli hostages held in Gaza for 150 Palestinians detained in Israeli jails may be repeated later this month. 
Speaking on condition of anonymity, the official said: “The second batch will follow the first batch. They would need four or five days to organise it … will involve 50 Israeli in return for 150 Palestinian.”
Israel has already offered to extend the planned four-day pause by a day for every additional 10 hostages handed over by Hamas.
Earlier today a spokesperson for the Israel Defense Forces said the military would be implementing an “operational pause” rather than a ceasefire. He could not confirm when the hostilities might cease, and said the army was awaiting further instructions from politicians.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.33pm GMT 
Jason Burke is in Jerusalem for the Guardian, and offers this analysis of the announcement of an Israel-Hamas deal:
 The consequences of the agreement are already rippling out across the region and beyond  but those most immediately affected will be the people of Gaza. 
Much of the north of Gaza has been made uninhabitable by the Israeli bombardment, and 1.7 million people have been displaced. All are now crammed into the south, which has been without adequate food, fuel, clean water, shelter and much else for almost seven weeks after Israel cut off supplies.
Any cessation of hostilities and promises of increased aid will provide only very partial relief to the shattered, battered and grieving inhabitants of the the territory.
One UN official who has spent six weeks living in a compound near Khan Younis, in southern Gaza, with his family, told the Guardian on Wednesday: “I wish that once the ceasefire starts it opens the way for political solution, but it’s not clear yet … It also it makes us think: what are we going to do when the war ends? Where to go when most of the people, and I am one of them, have lost their home? Where to live, when there is no infrastructure, no schools, no hospitals? It would take years just to remove the rubble.”
The deal will also provide only partial relief to the families of those 239 mainly Israeli hostages thought to be in Gaza. Even for families whose relatives are not immediately released, the deal offers hope. But for the families and friends of captured military personnel, possibly numbering about 100, there is the deeply distressing knowledge that these are the most valuable to Hamas and so will be the last to be freed.
 Read more of Jason Burke’s analysis here: Gaza ceasefire deal brings relief but little hope of durable peace
 Related:  Gaza ceasefire deal brings relief but little hope of durable peace
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.27pm GMT 
Plumes of dust and smoke continued to rise on the horizon across the Gaza-Israel border on Wednesday despite Israel and Hamas agreeing to a ceasefire of at least four days to let in aid and release at least 50 Israeli hostages held by Hamas. Israel is expected to release up to 150 Palestinians it is holding in jails.
block-time published-time 1.03pm GMT 
 Jeremy Hunt,  the chancellor of the UK, has been giving a financial statement to British MPs. During it he expressed his “horror” in parliament at the attack on Israeli citizens on 7 October and the subsequent loss of life on both sides, while announcing additional funds to combat antisemitism.
PA reports he said:
I am deeply concerned about the rise of antisemitism in our country, so I am announcing up to £7m over the next three years for organisations like the Holocaust Educational Trust to tackle antisemitism in schools and universities.
I will also repeat the £3m uplift to the Community Security Trust. When it comes to antisemitism and all forms of racism, we must never allow the clock to be turned back.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.07pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.58pm GMT 
 The Syrian army said on Wednesday that Israel launched aerial strikes on outposts in the vicinity of Damascus  but that nobody was injured or killed . 
The statement said the rockets were fired from the Golan Heights. Reuters reports that the statement gave no further details, and that the Israeli military declined to comment.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.47pm GMT 
There are currently unconfirmed media reports of an Israeli strike inside Syria aimed at southern Damascus.
More details soon …
block-time published-time 12.27pm GMT 
 IDF: army waiting for final timing details of what it calls 'operational pause'  
Dan Sabbagh is the Guardian’s defence and security editor:
 A spokesperson for the Israel  Defense Forces emphasised on Wednesday lunchtime that the military would be implementing an “operational pause” rather than a ceasefire and that forces were still waiting on final details of the agreement. 
Lt Col Richard Hecht, the IDF’s international spokesperson, told a briefing that “our terminology is not ceasefire, our terminology is an operational pause”, so hinting that Israeli bombing could restart whenever the hostage exchange is completed.
Hecht said he was not able to confirm when fighting would stop or how a ceasefire would operate because orders have not been received from the country’s political leaders. “We still haven’t got the nitty gritty of this framework,” he added.
But Hecht did suggest the ceasefire might not begin in Gaza for over 24 hours from now. “We still have probably, maybe a day-plus before this thing matures, and things can happen in that day. And I assume today is going to be a day of fighting in Gaza,” he said.
Media reports in Egypt and Israel had earlier suggested that a truce would come into effect at 10am tomorrow (8am GMT).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.24pm GMT 
 The number of journalists killed in the Israel-Hamas conflict since 7 October has increased to at least 53, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). 
It said it also investigating numerous unconfirmed reports of other journalists being killed, being missing, detained, or injured.
On Tuesday, Al Mayadeen’s reporter Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih al Mamari were killed by an Israeli strike in southern Lebanon. Israel’s military said about the incident: “This is an area with active hostilities, where exchanges of fire occur. Presence in the area is dangerous.” The TV channel accused Israel of deliberately targeting its workers.
The CPJ says the journalist death toll comprises 46 Palestinians, and four journalists from Israel, and three from Lebanon.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.20pm GMT 
 Jordan’s King Abdullah  is going to Cairo today for talks with the Egyptian president, Abdel Fattah al-Sisi, on how to end “Israel’s aggression against the Palestinians”, Reuters reports a palace statement  as saying. 
An official told the news agency the talks will focus on how to turn a four-day truce agreed between Israel and Hamas into a permanent ceasefire that brings an end to the Israeli bombardment of Gaza and averts a humanitarian catastrophe.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.51am GMT 
 Six Palestinians were shot dead in an Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank on Wednesday, AFP reports the Palestinian Authority’s health ministry said. 
The Palestine Red Crescent Society said the Israeli army stormed the refugee camp in the northern city of Tulkarm and briefly detained a 16-year-old with shrapnel wounds to his face.
A 26-year-old young woman “beaten by the Israeli army” had been transferred to hospital, the Red Crescent added.
The Israeli army was still in the camp at mid-morning on Wednesday, an AFP photographer reported.
    An Israeli military vehicle is used during a raid in Tulkarm, in the Israeli-occupied West Bank on 22 November. Photograph: Raneen Sawafta/Reuters   
More than 200 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli soldiers and settlers across the West Bank since the Hamas attacks on southern Israel on 7 October, according to the ministry.
    Palestinians walk amid the rubble of a destroyed house, in the aftermath of an Israeli raid in Tulkarm, 22 November. Photograph: Raneen Sawafta/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.56am GMT
block-time published-time 11.45am GMT 
 Hamas official Moussa Abu Marzouk has been appearing in the media in Israel with more details on the implementation of the Israel-Hamas truce, which he has said will come into effect tomorrow at 10am local time (8am GMT). 
The Times of Israel reports that he said this to Al Jazeera, and that according to Israel’s Channel 12, Abu Marzouk said that most of the hostages slated to be released have foreign citizenship.
These details have not been confirmed by Israel.
There are also unconfirmed media reports that Hezbollah has said it is not a party to the Israel-Hamas deal, but will respect the truce if Israel does. Israel and Hezbollah fighters have been repeatedly exchanging fire over the UN-drawn blue line that separates Lebanon and Israel.
block-time published-time 11.31am GMT 
Patrick Wintour is the Guardian’s diplomatic editor:
 The western powers on the UN security council face a choice of either demanding Israel lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or standing complicit in Israel war crimes and collective punishment, Arab and Islamic foreign ministers said on a visit to London. 
The ministers are lobbying the five permanent members of the security council to back a new humanitarian resolution instructing Israel to accept that UN agencies, and not the Israel Defense forces, clear aid coming through the Rafah crossing from Egypt to Gaza. At the moment everything has to be inspected by Israel.
The delegation, led by representatives from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Indonesia, Nigeria and the Palestinian territories were in London for talks with the foreign secretary, David Cameron, before seeing the French president, Emmanuel Macron, later today. They have already been to Beijing and Moscow.
At a briefing in London they also called for the imminent humanitarian four-day pause to be extended to a total cessation of hostilities.
The Saudi foreign minister, Faisal bin Farhan Al-Saud, said: “It is absolutely necessary. It is in our opinion that we transition from temporary to an extended ceasefire, and go from there.”
He said if the west rejected the appeals of 2 billion people in the Middle East that would be a significant message, adding the UN had a choice in either containing Israel or being complicit in war crimes.
The Jordanian foreign minister, Ayman Safadi, said there was a huge gap between the 200 trucks a day to be allowed over the Rafah crossing under the agreement and the 800 a day needed.
The ministers are also conveying a broader political message to western capitals that, unless they do more to restrain Israel, a new generation of radicals will be born. One foreign minister said Israel was trying to create the conditions for a slow enforced migration from Gaza, saying :“We are near to a point of no return and the west has to wake up to what Israel is planning.”
The Egyptian foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, said the proposed UN humanitarian resolution would require Israel to follow procedures allowed at Syrian border crossings, where UN agencies check the aid inside convoys, rather than give Israel total control.
He said “the unspoken objective” of Israel was complete displacement from Gaza. He added Israel’s plan was to funnel Palestinians into a small safe area in southern Gaza is a prelude to a mass transfer out of Gaza.
The Indonesian foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, said Israel was systematically breaking the laws of war, and many were tired of the lectures from the west about international law.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.44am GMT
block-time published-time 11.22am GMT 
Ahmed al-Kahlout, the director of the Kamal Adwan hospital, has told Al Jazeera that the hospital has received more than 60 dead and about 1,000 wounded people since last night.
He told the news network:
Shelling and bombardment are increasing everywhere in the vicinity of the hospital. A lot of buildings have been badly affected. We need to keep in mind this hospital is now only one operating hospital from Wadi Gaza to northern Gaza. The medical teams are very tired. We don’t have a single drop of fuel. We work in the dark using handheld searchlights.
The claims have not been independently verified. 
block-time published-time 11.14am GMT 
The Israeli foreign minister, Eli Cohen, has told Army Radio ithat the process of Hamas transferring hostages back to Israel is expected to begin tomorrow. He did not offer exact details of how many hostages would be exchanged at first, or when.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.45am GMT
block-time published-time 11.08am GMT 
 Pope Francis on Wednesday met separately with relatives of Israeli hostages in Gaza and of Palestinian prisoners in Israel, saying both sides “suffer so much”. 
At the end of his weekly audience at the Vatican, AFP reports the 86-year-old pontiff revealed he had received two delegations, “one of Israelis who have relatives as hostages in Gaza, and another of Palestinians who have relatives held prisoner in Israel”.
“They suffer a lot and I heard how they both suffer,” he said, urging those gathered in St Peter’s Square to pray for peace.
“Wars do this, but here we have gone beyond wars. This is not war, this is terrorism”.
He did not elaborate on what he was referring to as terrorism.
    Pope Francis blesses pilgrims during his general audience in Saint Peter Square at the Vatican on 22 November. Photograph: Andreas Solaro/AFP/Getty Images   
The Vatican said last week the pope hoped to show his “spiritual closeness” during the private meetings, which it said would be “exclusively humanitarian in nature”.
    A group of people show pictures and scarves with the Palestinian flag during Pope Francis' general audience in Saint Peter's Square. Photograph: Alessandro Di Meo/EPA      
block-time published-time 11.05am GMT 
Israeli national security minister Itamar Ben-Gvir, who yesterday cautioned against Israel striking any deal with Hamas, has posted to social media an image which appears to be Israeli soldiers inside Gaza displaying the flag of the Israel Border Police.
In the message, Ben-Gvir said “The flag of the Border Guard is raised proudly in the heart of Gaza – in memory of the soldiers of the Border Guard who fell. Keep yourselves heroes, eliminate as many enemies as possible and return to us in peace”
iwrtl??? ???? ????? ???? ?????? ??? ??? - ???? ????? ???? ????? ?????? ??"?. ???? ?? ????? ???????, ????? ??? ????? ???? ????? ????? ??????????? pic.twitter.com/u14AjijTyq
 — ????? ?? ???? (@itamarbengvir) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 10.57am GMT 
While world leaders welcome the announcement of a limited ceasefire and pause in hostilities that is expected to come into effect tomorrow, Israel continues to bombard the Gaza Strip. Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires.
    Smoke rises after Israeli air strikes in Gaza, as seen from southern Israel. Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters      Palestinians search for survivors of an Israeli bombing in Rafah. Photograph: Hatem Ali/AP      Another view of the destruction in Rafah in the south of the Gaza Strip, an area which Israel has repeatedly instructed Gaza’s northern residents to flee to. Photograph: Hatem Ali/AP      Palestinians evacuate survivors of an Israeli bombing in Rafah. Photograph: Hatem Ali/AP      
block-time published-time 10.43am GMT 
Family members of Israeli hostages held by Hamas in Gaza are giving a press conference after meeting with Pope Francis at the Vatican. You can watch it above. You may need to refresh the page to get the play button to appear.
block-time published-time 10.42am GMT 
 Israel’s military has this morning claimed that during its campaign in Gaza it has “exposed and destroyed approximately 400 terror tunnel shafts”. 
In a message posted to Telegram it said: “The Yahalom special forces unit of the Combat Engineering Corps has played a significant role in uncovering and destroying these shafts using various methods.
“Hamas has embedded its network of terrorist tunnels below population centres across the Gaza Strip. Many of the shafts leading to its tunnel network are located within civilian hospitals, schools and homes.”
The claims have not been independently verified.
The Hamas government in the territory claims that, since 7 October, Israel has killed at least 14,100 people, mainly civilians including thousands of children. It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify the casualty figures being issued from inside Gaza.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.46am GMT
block-time published-time 10.17am GMT 
 Emmanuel Macron has said he welcomes the Israel-Hamas hostage deal,  add ing that France is “working tirelessly to release all hostages”. 
In a social media post , France’s president said: “I welcome the announcement of an agreement for the release of hostages and a humanitarian truce. We are working tirelessly to release all hostages. The humanitarian truce announced should allow to introduce aid and rescue the civilians in Gaza.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.37am GMT
block-time published-time 10.09am GMT 
The funeral has been held in Beirut, Lebanon, for two journalists of Al Mayadeen, reporter Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih al Mamari. They were killed yesterday by an Israeli strike in the south of the country.
    A crowd gathers at the funeral ceremony. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images      The two journalists were killed close to the town of Tayr Harfa just after the TV team had just finished their broadcast. Photograph: Wael Hamzeh/EPA      Al Mayadeen yesterday accused Israel of deliberately targeting Farah Omar and Rabih al Mamari. Photograph: Anadolu/Getty Images   
Israel’s military offensive in Gaza  has produced the deadliest month for journalists since statistics began  more than three decades ago. Before yesterday’s deaths, reporters’ watchdog the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) had already recorded the deaths of 48 reporters since the Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.14am GMT
block-time published-time 9.54am GMT 
 Palestine Red Crescent Society says it is evacuating patients from al-Shifa hospital  
 The Palestine Red Crescent Society has posted to social media to say that it is in the process of evacuating patients from  al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza. 
In a post on Facebook it wrote:
14 ambulances belonging to the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, accompanied by the UN and Doctors Without Borders, arrived to evacuate patients and injured from al-Shifa hospital to hospitals in the South, where kidney patients will be transferred to Abu Youssef Al-Najjar hospital in Rafah and the injured will be transferred to the European hospital south of Khan Younis.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.59am GMT
block-time published-time 9.51am GMT 
Israel’s military has posted to Telegram, saying: “A short while ago, IDF fighter jets struck a number of Hezbollah terror targets in Lebanon. Among the targets struck were terrorist infrastructure and a military site in which Hezbollah terrorists operated.”
The claims have not been independently verified.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.59am GMT
block-time published-time 9.34am GMT 
The Kremlin on Wednesday hailed a ceasefire agreement in Gaza as the “first good news for a long time” in the Israel-Palestinian conflict and said humanitarian pauses were the only way to build efforts for a sustainable settlement, Reuters reports.
block-time published-time 9.29am GMT 
 In comments this morning, France’s foreign minister, Catherine Colonna, has been critical of Israel, saying that there are too many civilian deaths and this is “unworthy of a democracy”. 
Speaking on France Inter radio she said the Israel-Hamas deal was “a moment of real hope”, and hailed “particularly the work of Qatar” in clinching it after weeks of tortuous talks.
Colonna also said that Israel must do more to protect the civilian population in Gaza.
“There have been too many deaths, we have been saying this for weeks,” she said.
Civilians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank also needed to be protected better after about 200 people there had been killed by Israeli settlers, Colonna said.
“This is unacceptable and unworthy of a democracy,” AFP reports she said.
Eight French citizens have been missing since the 7 October Hamas attack on Israel and for the moment, it is not known if all of them are being held hostage. “We have to distinguish between the cases that we are certain about and others,” Colonna said.
Among the hostages were a French adolescent boy, and also an adolescent girl for whom France had received proof of life by video, she said.
 Meyer Habib, a French deputy whose constituency of French nationals abroad includes those in Israel, told Jewish community broadcaster Radio J on Wednesday that “one or two French people” were among the hostages to be released as part of the deal.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.58am GMT
block-time published-time 9.20am GMT 
 Oxfam GB’s head of policy and advocacy, Katy Chakrabortty, has described the Israel-Hamas deal as “a Band-Aid to a bleeding wound”, calling for the international community to “start the hard work towards peace for all Israelis and Palestinians ”. 
In a statement, she said:
It would be an optimism to see this as the beginnings of a road toward a permanent ceasefire – but that looks distant without concerted diplomatic pressure.
This pause of the relentless bombing and destruction that is causing such suffering to more than 2 million Palestinians is a welcome respite for the delivery of some humanitarian aid – but no more than that.
The next four days will be eaten up by a desperate emergency effort that can offer only very limited relief, not equal to the size of suffering and destruction and ultimately with no sustainability. This is a band-aid that will be ripped off a bleeding wound after four days.
The statement said that diplomatic efforts should include “tackling the core of the conflict: ending Israel’s prolonged military occupation of Palestinian territory and the blockade on Gaza while also securing the release of all hostages.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.57am GMT
block-time published-time 9.02am GMT 
 The EU’s foreign affairs chief, Josep Borrell, has been told by the Palestinian Authority that 40% of housing has been demolished in Gaza. 
After his four-day trip to Israel, Palestine, Qatar, Bahrain and Jordan, he said he wanted to share his sense of “absolute urgency” in relation to the “dramatic situation in Gaza” and the “tenuous hope” about moving towards peace talks and enduring political solutions for the Middle East.
The figures from the Palestinian Authority “confirmed the worst fears” he said in relation to Gaza with Israelis indicating an intensification of military operations in the south of the Strip.
In a lengthy blog post , he also revealed that the Israel military had told him it plans to create a “small safe area along the sea in the southern part of Gaza” for the civilian population “in order to carry out the ground operations in the south” of the Gaza strip where more than 2 million live.
“This did not reassure me about the future course of events if we fail to achieve a rapid and durable de-escalation of the military operations,” he said.
He said his meetings with hostage families had made it “fully understandable the shock that Israeli society suffered” after Hamas’s attack and underlined the “absolute urgency of moving forward”.
He said he raised the hostages with everyone he met.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.32am GMT
block-time published-time 8.51am GMT 
The Associated Press reports from Dubai that the International Committee of the Red Cross says it is standing by to assist any swap in the Israel-Hamas war.
It quotes the organisation as saying: “Currently, we are actively engaged in talks with the parties to help carry out any humanitarian agreement they reach. As a neutral intermediary, it is important to clarify that we are not part of the negotiations, and we do not make decisions on the substance of it. Our role is to facilitate the implementation, once the parties agree.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.30am GMT
block-time published-time 8.46am GMT 
Germany’s foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has said  that “nothing in the world can undo” the suffering of those who have been held hostage by Hamas, but that the Israel-Hamas deal was a “breakthrough”.
She added on social media that “the humanitarian break must be used to bring vital aid to the people in Gaza”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.49am GMT
block-time published-time 8.38am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    Smoke billows after an Israeli strike near the Kamal Adwan hospital in Beit Lahia in the northern Gaza Strip as people mourn near their dead friends and relatives. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images      A handout picture from Israel’s military shows Israeli soldiers operating on the ground inside Gaza. Photograph: Israel Defense Forces/Reuters      A UN car drives past the rubble of a building following Israeli strikes in Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty Images      A man walks past portraits of Israeli hostages posted on a wall in Tel Aviv. Photograph: Ahmad Gharabli/AFP/Getty Images      Palestinians recover items from the rubble of a building following Israeli strikes in Rafah. Photograph: Said Khatib/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 8.03am GMT 
Some more detail on the prisoners that Israel has listed for potential freedom. Although the deal appears to allow for 150 to be released, Israel’s government has named 300 people.
A BBC analysis of the list reports that “most are aged 17 or 18, with the overall age range 14-59. The majority of the detainees – 274 of 300 – are male.”
The offences they have been accused of include “attempted murder, throwing a bomb, creating an explosive or incendiary object, throwing stones, contact with a hostile organisation, grievous bodily harm and arson on nationalist grounds”.
The Times of Israel reports that the government has revealed more of the mechanism around release, with “the war cabinet of prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, defence minister Yoav Gallant, and minister Benny Gantz to decide on the identity of prisoners to be released in each phase.”
It notes that “any Palestinian prisoners on the list who have not been released by the end of the exchanges will not be freed”.
That suggests an anxious period of waiting ahead for Palestinian and Israeli families to see which hostages and detainees are cleared for return. Hamas is thought to be holding about 240 Israelis abducted on 7 October.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.11am GMT
block-time published-time 8.00am GMT 
 Gaza hostage deal: what we know so far …  
It is 10am in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here is what we know so far about the Israel-Hamas deal …
Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire, both sides announced on Wednesday morning. The first hostage release is expected on Thursday morning, and the total number of hostages freed could rise.A statement from the Israeli prime minister’s office said the “lull” in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. It did not say when the ceasefire would start, though in his address to his cabinet, Benjamin Netanyahu said the first hostages should be free within 48 hours of the agreement.Qatar’s foreign ministry said early on Wednesday that the start time of the deal would be announced in the next 24 hours. It said the ceasefire will “allow the entry of a larger number of humanitarian convoys and relief aid, including fuel designated for humanitarian needs”.Hamas confirmed an agreement had been reached, calling it a “humanitarian truce” in which 150 Palestinian women and children would be freed from Israeli jails. It said that expanded humanitarian deliveries were also part of the agreement, as well as a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza during the four-day pause, with sorties over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day.The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said the hostage deal was “the result of tireless diplomacy and relentless effort across the department and broader US government”. “While this deal marks significant progress, we will not rest as long as Hamas continues to hold hostages in Gaza,” Blinken said.The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has said the EU will seek to use the pause in fighting in Gaza  to deliver more humanitarian aid to the territory. The UK foreign secretary, David Cameron, urged both sides to deliver the agreement in full, saying: “This pause provides an important opportunity to ensure much greater volumes of food, fuel and other life-saving aid can reach Gaza on a sustained basis.”The Times of Israel is reporting that the Almagor Terror Victims Association has said it will file a petition in Israel’s high court today against the hostage and ceasefire deal.Israel’s military has said its campaign inside Gaza is continuing, amid reports that the air bombardment has intensified in the last hours. The IDF said its operation is “striking terrorist infrastructure, killing terrorists, and locating weapons”. Al Jazeera’s Tareq Abu Azzoum reported that “Israeli air raids have intensified during the last couple of hours across the Gaza Strip” and “conditions remain dire”.Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, Iran ’s foreign minister, is to make a regional tour following the announcement of the deal.
 Related:  Gaza hostage deal: what do we know?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.09am GMT
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
Reuters reports that in a statement carried on state media, Jordan ’s foreign ministry said it hoped the four-day pause in fighting will allow much-needed humanitarian aid into the besieged territory, and would be a step that would end the war and prevent the targeting of Palestinians and their displacement from their land.
block-time published-time 7.44am GMT 
Here is a little bit more of the statement from the British foreign secretary, David Cameron. Describing the Israel-Hamas agreement as “a crucial step” and urging parties to deliver the deal in full, he said:
This pause provides an important opportunity to ensure much greater volumes of food, fuel and other life-saving aid can reach Gaza on a sustained basis.
We have already doubled our aid commitment to Palestinians this year and will work closely with the UN to ensure it reaches those who need it.
He said the UK would continue to work towards a “long-term political solution which enables both Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace” adding, “of course, we want to see all hostages released immediately, and families affected by the horrors of the 7 October terror attack reunited.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.04am GMT
block-time published-time 7.39am GMT 
 The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen ,  has said the EU will seek to use the pause in fighting in Gaza to deliver more humanitarian aid to the  territory. 
In the statement, Von der Leyen said:
I wholeheartedly welcome the agreement reached on the release of the 50 hostages and on a pause in hostilities. Every day these mothers and children are held hostage by terrorists is one too many. I share the joy of the families who can soon embrace their loved ones again. And I am so grateful to all those who have worked tirelessly through diplomatic channels in recent weeks to broker this agreement. I call on the terrorist Hamas to immediately release all hostages and allow them to return home safely.
The European Commission will do its utmost to use this pause for a humanitarian surge to Gaza. I have asked the Commissioner Janez Lenarcic to upscale further shipments to Gaza as quickly as possible to alleviate the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.43am GMT
block-time published-time 7.36am GMT 
 Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, Iran ’s foreign minister, is to make a regional tour after the announcement of the four-day pause in hostilities in Gaza.
More details soon …
block-time published-time 7.35am GMT 
Reuters reports that the British foreign secretary, David Cameron, has issued a statement about the Israel-Hamas deal, saying: “This agreement is a crucial step towards providing relief to the families of the hostages and addressing the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. I urge all parties to ensure the agreement is delivered in full.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.41am GMT
block-time published-time 7.29am GMT 
 Israel’s military has said its campaign inside Gaza is continu ing, amid reports that the air bombardment has intensified in the last hours. 
In a statement posted to Telegram, the IDF said:
The IDF is continuing to operate in the Gaza Strip, including striking terrorist infrastructure, killing terrorists, and locating weapons. In the past day, IDF troops directed aircraft to strike terrorist infrastructure from which fire was carried out at the forces. A number of terrorists were killed in the strike.
IDF ground troops also conducted targeted raids in Sheikh Za’id in north-west Jabalya. During the targeted raids, Hamas spotters were identified in the area and killed.
Furthermore, over the past few days, IDF troops conducted targeted raids in the area of Beit Hanoun. During the operation, the troops located numerous weapons, AK-47 rifles, axes, and ammunition stored inside a civilian residence. IDF troops also engaged in combat and eliminated a number of terrorist cells.
The claims have not been independently verified.
    This picture taken from southern Israel near the border with the Gaza Strip shows smoke billowing after an Israeli strike in north Gaza on 22 November. Photograph: Jack Guez/AFP/Getty Images   
Earlier Tareq Abu Azzoum, reporting for Al Jazeera from the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis, told the news network that “Israeli air raids have intensified during the last couple of hours across the Gaza Strip” and that there were “fears that air raids may intensify today before the agreement takes effect.”
He also said “conditions for people here remain very dire” but that “the short-term pause will give a glimmer of hope to Palestinians who want to go back to their houses to check their lands and even pull the victims under the rubble.”
    Palestinians inspect a damaged vehicle in the aftermath of an Israeli strike on an apartment in a residential building in Khan Younis in the south of the Gaza Strip. Photograph: Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.35am GMT
block-time published-time 7.16am GMT 
 The Times of Israel is reporting that the Almagor Terror Victims Association has said it will file a petition in Israel’s high court at noon today (10am local time) against the hostage and ceasefire deal. 
It writes:
Almagor demands to see the list of prisoners Israel is considering releasing as part of the deal.
The organization also demands to see all details of the commitments Israel is making to Hamas regarding restrictions on combat during the ceasefire period, including the cessation of intelligence gathering, as well as the delivery of fuel and other supplies which may help Hamas conduct terror operations against residents of Israel.’
Additionally, they call on justice minister Yariv Levin to disclose ‘the general commitments Israel is making to Hamas that have been given directly or through a third party.’
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.19am GMT
block-time published-time 7.08am GMT 
“We hope that there will be French people among the first batch of hostages to be released,” France ’s foreign minister Catherine Colonna told Inter radio this morning, Reuters reports.
This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com. 
block-time published-time 6.51am GMT 
Iraq’s Kataib Hezbollah paramilitary group said five of its members were killed in US strikes in the Jurf al-Sakhar area south of Baghdad, in a statement posted on social media on Wednesday.
The Pentagon said on Tuesday that a US warplane killed multiple Iranian-backed militiamen in Iraq after they fired a short-range ballistic missile at American and allied personnel in the country.
It was the first time the US has announced a strike on Iranian proxy forces in Iraq since targeting Tehran-linked sites in Syria on three occasions in recent weeks, in response to a spike in the number of attacks on US personnel.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.02am GMT
block-time published-time 6.43am GMT 
Dr Majed Al-Ansari, official spokesperson at Qatar’s ministry of foreign affairs, has released a statement on the hostage deal, saying:
Both Israel and Hamas have agreed to this deal after weeks of intense negotiations. Qatar has led the mediation efforts in coordination with the United States and regional partners, for whom we express our gratitude. Our focus is now on ensuring that both sides adhere to the terms of the agreement. The details include observing a four-day humanitarian pause to facilitate the release of a number of civilian hostages in exchange for prisoners detained in Israeli prisons. The deal can be extended if the release of further hostages can be agreed. We hope this agreement is the first step towards de-escalation and securing a long-term ceasefire, followed by a comprehensive political process to end this decades-long conflict.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.45am GMT
block-time published-time 6.37am GMT 
 Israel provides details of Palestinian prisoners to be released  
Israel provided details on Wednesday about Palestinian prisoners slated for release under a foreign-mediated deal to recover hostages held by Hamas militants in Gaza, a publication that appeared intended to allow for any last-minute legal challenges.
There must be a 24-hour waiting period before the hostage deal is implemented, to give Israeli citizens the chance to ask the supreme court to block the release of Palestinian prisoners, according to reports in Israeli media. The list posted on the justice ministry appeared to include 300 prisoners, which is twice the jailed 150 women and children that Israel has agreed to free in the initial four-day pause.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.46am GMT
block-time published-time 6.30am GMT 
The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, says the hostage deal was “the result of tireless diplomacy and relentless effort across the Department and broader United States government.”
“While this deal marks significant progress, we will not rest as long as Hamas continues to hold hostages in Gaza,” Blinken said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.47am GMT
block-time published-time 6.16am GMT 
The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, has welcomed the agreement between Hamas and Israel, Reuters reports.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.48am GMT
block-time published-time 6.04am GMT 
If you’re just joining us, Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire, both sides announced on Wednesday morning.
The Israeli hostages will be released over the period of four days, the Israeli government said.
The deal was confirmed by a senior US official, who told reporters that the freed hostages would include three Americans, one of them a three year-old girl. The official said that the first hostage release is expected on Thursday morning, and the total number of hostages freed could rise.
The ceasefire would be extended by a day for every 10 additional hostages released, the Israeli government said.
Israel will cease air sorties in southern Gaza and restrict them to six hours a day in the north, according to the Hamas account of the deal, which also says Israeli forces will not bring military vehicles into Gaza during the ceasefire, nor try to detain anyone.
 Related:  Israel and Hamas agree deal for release of some hostages and four-day ceasefire
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.30am GMT
block-time published-time 5.41am GMT 
 Why has a hostage agreement been reached now?  
Israel’s government has come under intense pressure domestically  to make progress on returning hostages. Their families mounted a high-profile “bring them home” campaign, meeting members of the Israeli war cabinet on Monday night. The military assault on northern Gaza had resulted in only one hostage being rescued alive.
International pressure has also been mounting in response to the increasingly desperate humanitarian situation in Gaza.  Bombing by the Israeli military followed by the ground invasion have caused a civilian crisis: food, water, fuel and medicines are desperately short, 1.7 million people out of 2.3 million  have been displaced, and only 10 out of 36 hospitals are functioning.
Last week, 68% of Americans said they supported a ceasefire , reflecting concerns in the US that Israel had gone too far in its military response.
Hamas is losing ground on the battlefield, as Israel’s forces have been able to capture large parts of northern Gaza, including Gaza City. Israel’s military claims to have inflicted heavy losses on 10 out of 24 Hamas battalions  and its leadership is believed to have relocated to the southern end of the Gaza Strip.
 Related:  Gaza hostage deal: what do we know?
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
Palestinian official news agency Wafa reports  that an administrator at the Indonesian hospital has received a text message saying, "“A special warning to evacuate the Indonesian hospital. The Israeli army has information about (military activity) inside the hospital, and the army is requesting an immediate halt to all military actions in the hospital. If military activity does not stop within 4 hours, the army reserves the right to engage in activity against military operations in accordance with international laws.”
The hospital administrator who spoke to Wafa said that the message had “created a state of panic” at the hospital.
The Guardian has not confirmed these reports independently. 
 Related:  What is Gaza’s Indonesian hospital and why is Israel targeting it?
block-time published-time 5.09am GMT 
 Israeli military orders evacuation of Indonesian hospital – report  
Mounir Al-Barsh, director-general of Gaza’s health ministry, has told Al Jazeera TV that the Israeli military ordered the evacuation of the Indonesian Hospital in Gaza City. 
Israel said militants were operating from the facility and threatened to act against them within four hours, he said.
After al-Shifa was raided last week, the Indonesian hospital was the only facility in northern Gaza still treating patients, with dozens of those killed and wounded by Israeli attacks flowing in overnight to Monday, according to medics.
But since Monday the hospital has been targeted by Israeli forces.  Gaza’s health ministry spokesperson, Ashraf al-Qudra, told Agence France-Presse on Tuesday that Israel was “laying siege” to the hospital. 
“We fear the same thing will happen there as it did in al-Shifa,” he said.
block-time published-time 4.48am GMT 
 What has been agreed?  
Fifty women and children held hostage by Hamas and other groups in Gaza since 7 October are to be released in exchange for a four-day ceasefire  in a deal brokered by Qatar with the support of the US.
A US official said three Americans would be among those freed, including a girl who turns four this week, and that the first release should come by Thursday.
According to Hamas , Israel will release 150 Palestinian prisoners, all women and children, from Israeli jails and allow hundreds of aid trucks a day to cross the Rafah border with Egypt, providing humanitarian supplies to Palestinians in Gaza.
Israel will cease air sorties in southern Gaza  and restrict them to six hours a day in the north, according to the Hamas account of the deal, which also says Israeli forces will not bring military vehicles into Gaza during the ceasefire, nor try to detain anyone.
The ceasefire would be extended by a day for every 10 additional hostages released, the Israeli government said.
The agreement temporarily pauses a war that has lasted more than six weeks so far. It has cost the lives of 14,128 Palestinians in Gaza, according to the government media office in Gaza, and more than 1,200 people in Israel, most of whom were victims of the surprise Hamas cross-border attack on 7 October.
 Related:  Gaza hostage deal: what do we know?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.41am GMT
block-time published-time 4.35am GMT 
US Senate Majority leader Chuck Schumer has released a statement on the deal, saying he is “pleased and relieved”. 
He adds that the agreement will also, “give the International Red Cross access to treat the hostages who remain in Gaza for the "first time since they were taken on October 7th”.
Schumer adds: 
The fact that this agreement to pause hostilities and free hostages will  allow additional humanitarian assistance into Gaza for the millions of innocent Palestinians who have nothing to do with Hamas is a positive development.
The Senate will continue working to pass additional humanitarian assistance for innocent Palestinians, and make sure that Israel has the aid it needs to defend itself to ensure Hamas can never again pose such a threat to Israel. 
block-time published-time 4.29am GMT 
AFP reports that ahead of the cabinet vote, Netanyahu had faced a revolt from within his right-wing coalition, some of whom believe it gave too much to the Palestinian militants they have vowed to crush.
Hardline Minister for National Security Itamar Ben-Gvir signalled he would vote against the agreement, saying it should include the release of Israeli soldiers also taken by Hamas.
Israel’s hawkish Defence Minister Yoav Gallant said before the crunch meeting that he had won assurances that the deal would not spell the end of the war to destroy Hamas.
“Immediately after we have exhausted this phase”, he said, security operations would “continue in full force.”
In a statement, the Israeli government underscored that the truce agreement would not mean the end of the war in Gaza.
Israel “will continue the war in order to return home all of the hostages, complete the elimination of Hamas and ensure that there will be no new threat to the State of Israel from Gaza,” a government statement said.
At least 14,128 Palestinians, the vast majority civilians, have been killed Gaza since Israel’s unprecedented airstrikes began after 7 October, according to the government media office in Gaza. The latest death toll update includes at least 5,600 children and 3,550 women.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.41am GMT
block-time published-time 4.18am GMT 
Here is everything we know about the deal to release hostages from Gaza, pause fighting for four days and release Palestinian prisoners:
 Related:  Gaza hostage deal: what do we know?
block-time published-time 4.12am GMT 
 Biden thanks Qatar and Egypt for their 'critical leadership' in deal  
US President Joe Biden has released a statement welcoming the deal for a pause in fighting and the release of hostages and prisoners. Biden thanks, “Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani of Qatar and President Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi of Egypt for their critical leadership and partnership in reaching this deal”.
He adds that the deal, “should bring home additional American hostages”.
Biden says:
I welcome the deal to secure the release of hostages taken by the terrorist group Hamas during its brutal assault against Israel on October 7th. … I thank Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani of Qatar and President Abdel-Fattah El-Sisi of Egypt for their critical leadership and partnership in reaching this deal. And I appreciate the commitment that Prime Minister Netanyahu and his government have made in supporting an extended pause to ensure this deal can be fully carried out and to ensure the provision of additional humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of innocent Palestinian families in Gaza. […] It is important that all aspects of this deal be fully implemented. …
Today’s deal should bring home additional American hostages, and I will not stop until they are all released.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.03am GMT
block-time published-time 4.09am GMT 
 Qatar says 'starting time of the pause will be announced in 24 hours'  
Qatar has confirmed the four-day ceasefire, as well as the swap between Israel and Hamas, The Associated Press reports. The news agency is also saying that the start time of the deal is to be announced in the next 24 hours.
The statement early Wednesday morning from Qatar’s foreign ministry described the talks that produced the agreement as a mediation by Egypt, the US and Qatar for a “humanitarian pause,” adding that 50 civilian hostages will be released in exchange for “a number of Palestinian woman and children detained in Israeli prisons.”
“The starting time of the pause will be announced within the next 24 hours and last for four days, subject to extension,” the statement said.
“The agreement includes the release of 50 civilian women and children hostages currently held in the Gaza Strip in exchange for the release of a number of Palestinian women and children detained in Israeli prisons, the number of those released will be increased in later stages of implementing the agreement.”
It added that the ceasefire will “allow the entry of a larger number of humanitarian convoys and relief aid, including fuel designated for humanitarian needs.” It offered no specifics on that, however.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.13am GMT
block-time published-time 3.57am GMT 
The senior US official also said Hamas needed the pause in fighting in order to locate some of the hostages, meaning they may be able to identify and collect additional women and children to be released.
They also said a rigorous inspection regime would ensure the militant group did not use the pause to get more weapons, according to Reuters.
Officials hope the pause in fighting will also be observed in northern Israel where there have been clashes between Hezbollah and Israeli forces.
block-time published-time 3.44am GMT 
The total number of hostages freed could rise, a senior US official has said.
The deal was confirmed by a senior US official, who told reporters that the freed hostages would include three Americans, one of them a three-year-old girl. 
The official said that the first hostage release is expected on Thursday morning.
“The deal has ultimately been structured to incentivise releases beyond 50,” the senior official said, adding that the agreement “is now structured for women and children in the first phase, but with an expectation for further releases.
block-time published-time 3.31am GMT 
Here’s our full report on the hostage deal:
Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for a four-day partial ceasefire, the Israeli government announced early on Wednesday.
The announcement from the prime minister’s office said the lull in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. It did not say when the ceasefire would start, though in his address to his cabinet, Benjamin Netanyahu  said the first hostages should be free within 48 hours of the agreement.
Hamas confirmed an agreement had been reached and added that 150 Palestinian women and children would be freed from Israeli jails.
“The Israeli government is committed to the return of all abductees home,” the government statement said in a WhatsApp message. “Tonight, the government approved the outline for the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 abductees – women and children – will be released for four days, during which there will be a lull in the fighting. The release of every 10 additional abductees will result in an additional day of respite.”
 Related:  Israel and Hamas agree deal for release of some hostages and four-day ceasefire
block-time published-time 3.26am GMT 
 Three US citizens held by Hamas to be released as part of deal, US official says  
Three Americans held by Hamas in Gaza are expected to be among at least 50 hostages to be released by the Islamist Palestinian group under the deal arranged with Israel, the US and Qatar, a senior US official said according to Reuters.
The three include a 3-year-old girl whose parents were among the more than 1,200 people killed in Hamas’ initial 7 October attack on southern Israel, the official said.
The official, speaking to reporters on condition of anonymity, said it was likely that more than 50 hostages, largely women and children, will be released once a pause in fighting takes hold.
The hostage group will include two American women and an American girl named Abigail who will turn four on Friday, the official said.
Initial releases of hostages are expected within 24 hours of the deal’s announcement, with the first likely to be freed Thursday morning, the official said.
“I would say it’s at least 50 of the women and children over a period of four to five days,” the official said, without providing details of any other nationalities expected to be released.
block-time published-time 3.21am GMT 
 150 Palestinian prisoners to be released as part of deal, says Hamas  
Hamas will release 50 women and children under the age of 19 in exchange for 150 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, the militant group has said in a statement seen by Reuters. 
The statement said the two sides had agreed to stop all fighting for four days and that Israel had agreed not to attack or arrest anyone in Gaza during that period.
Air traffic would stop completely in southern Gaza during the four days and for daily six-hour periods in the north, Hamas said.
Hundreds of trucks would be allowed in carrying humanitarian aid to all areas of Gaza, it continued.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.22am GMT
block-time published-time 3.15am GMT 
 Israel and Hamas agree four-day ceasefire and release of 50 hostages held in Gaza  
The Israeli government has announced the deal for the release of 50 hostages, all of whom are women and children, over four days, during which there will be pause in fighting. 
Groups of 12-13 hostages will be released per day, the Times of Israel  reports.
Here is the full statement on the deal from the Israeli Government:
The Government of Israel is obligated to return home all of the hostages. Tonight, the Government has approved the outline of the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 hostages – women and children – will be released over four days, during which a pause in the fighting will be held. The release of every additional ten hostages will result in one additional day in the pause.
The Government of Israel, the IDF and the security services will continue the war in order to return home all of the hostages, complete the elimination of Hamas and ensure that there will be no new threat to the State of Israel from Gaza.
The Times of Israel also reports that there may be 30 more hostages released and that the pause in fighting could be extended “by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages”.
Earlier, Israeli media, including Channel 12 news, reported that if the deal was approved, the first release of hostages is expected on Thursday.
The delay is because if the deal is agreed to, there must be a 24-hour waiting period before it is implemented, to give Israeli citizens the chance to ask the supreme court to block the release of Palestinian prisoners, according to reports in Israeli media.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.21am GMT
block-time published-time 3.10am GMT 
 Opening summary  
This is the Guardian’s live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war with me, Helen Sullivan.
The Israeli prime minister’s office has announced that Israel’s cabinet has voted to approve a deal that will see the release of 50 hostages, women and children, over four days, during which there will be pause in fighting in Gaza.
Groups of 12-13 hostages will be released per day, the Times of Israel reports, and fighting may be paused for more days if more hostages are released. In return, 150 Palestinian women and children will be released from Israel’s jails, Hamas has said.
Here is what we know about the hostage deal approved by Israel’s cabinet:
The Israeli Prime Minister’s office announced early on Wednesday that Israel’s cabinet has voted to approve a deal that will see the release of 50 hostages, who are women and children, over four days, during which there will be pause in fighting in Gaza.A government statement on the deal said, “The Government of Israel is obligated to return home all of the hostages. Tonight, the Government has approved the outline of the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 hostages – women and children – will be released over four days, during which a pause in the fighting will be held. The release of every additional ten hostages will result in one additional day in the pause.”Three Americans held by Hamas in Gaza are expected to be among at least 50 hostages to be released by the Islamist Palestinian group under the deal arranged with Israel, the US and Qatar, a senior US official said according to Reuters. The three include a 3-year-old girl whose parents were among the more than 1,200 people killed in Hamas’ initial 7 October attack on southern Israel, the official said.The deal cannot be enacted until Thursday to allow time for Israeli judges to review potential legal challenges to the release of prisoners, the New York Times and reports, citing Israeli officials.Groups of 12-13 hostages will be released per day, the Times of Israel reports, and fighting may be paused for more days if more hostages are released.Hamas said that during the four-day truce Israel had agreed not to attack or arrest anyone in Gazaand that air traffic would stop completely in southern Gaza and for daily six-hour periods in the north. It also said hundreds of trucks would be allowed in to all areas of Gaza carrying humanitarian aid.A senior US official said that three Americans including a girl about to turn 4 would be included among those released by Hamas. The official, speaking to reporters on condition of anonymity, said it was likely that more than 50 hostages, largely women and children, would be released once a pause in fighting takes hold.Israel believes Hamas  could locate about 30 more Israeli mothers and children beyond the initial 50, the Times of Israel reports, and that the halt in fighting could be extended by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages who are located and freed, the government official said. “Hamas is claiming it cannot immediately track down around 10 children taken from Israel during the shock October 7 attack,” the Times of Israel reports.Axios reports that the deal also includes an agreement by Israel to allow “around 300 aid trucks per day to enter Gaza from Egypt” as well as additional fuel.Only three cabinet ministers opposed the deal, Axios and Al Jazeera report. The ministers opposed each belong to the Religious Zionism Party.
Other key recent developments include:
At least 14,128 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza since the war began, according to the government media office in Gaza. The latest death toll update includes at least 5,600 children and 3,550 women, it said.A US warplane killed multiple Iranian-backed militiamen in Iraq after they fired a short-range ballistic missile at American and allied personnel in the country, the Pentagon said Tuesday. It is the first time the United States has announced a strike on Iranian proxy forces in Iraq since targeting Tehran-linked sites in Syria on three occasions in recent weeks, in response to a spike in attacks on American personnel.The World Health Organization (WHO) has said it stands in solidarity  with health workers at al-Awda hospital in north Gaza after three doctors and “a patient companion” were reportedly killed in an attack on the facility.  Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) have said two of its doctors and a third health ministry doctor were killed after what it said was a strike  on al-Awda hospital.  The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) said three doctors were killed in what it said was an Israeli strike  on al-Awda, one of the last remaining functional hospitals in northern Gaza.The WHO also confirmed that one of its staff was killed in Gaza on Tuesday alongside her six-month-old baby.Dima Abdullatif Mohammed Alhaj, 29, was a critical part of the WHO’s trauma and emergency team  and had been part of the organisation since 2019, it said. She was killed when her parents’ house in southern Gaza, where she had evacuated from Gaza City, was bombed, the WHO said in a statement. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he was “devastated”  by the news of her death.The UN has warned that a “tragic … entirely avoidable surge” in child deaths is expected in Gaza, where on average a child is killed every 10 minutes. The UN children’s agency (Unicef) said the number of children dying could skyrocket  due to the serious additional threat of a mass disease outbreak in the besieged Palestinian territory.The Palestinian poet and author Mosab Abu Toha has been released  after he was detained by Israeli forces along with scores of other Palestinian men trying to leave northern Gaza, according to his friends and Israeli officials.At least 52 journalists and media workers have been killed since the Israel-Hamas war began on 7 October, according to  the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). On Tuesday, a Hezbollah-affiliated news channel said two of its journalists were killed by an Israeli airstrike  in the south of Lebanon, near the boundary with Israel.The European Commission has said it will continue to provide financial aid to Palestinians after an investigation found no evidence  that the money was going to Hamas. The EU is the world’s biggest provider of assistance to Palestinians, with almost €1.2bn earmarked for 2021-2024.The Scottish Labour party have formally backed demands for a full ceasefire in Israel’s bombing of Gaza.  Anas Sarwar supported a motion  put forward by Scotland’s first minister, Humza Yousaf, on Tuesday calling for an immediate truce,  widening the Labour party’s divisions  on the conflict.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.40am GMT

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Israel and Hamas agree deal for release of some hostages and four-day ceasefire
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 2:14 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:6
Length: 1318 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem, Ruth Michaelson in Istanbul and Julian Borger in Washington
Highlight: Fifty Israeli hostages held in Gaza will be freed over four days in exchange for the release of 150 Palestinian prisoners and a lull in Israeli military operationsIsrael-Hamas war: latest updates
Body


Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire, both sides announced on Wednesday morning.
The deal was confirmed by a senior US official, who told reporters that the freed hostages would include three Americans, one of them a three year-old girl. The official said that the first hostage release is expected on Thursday morning, and the total number of hostages freed could rise.
US president Joe Biden welcomed the deal and thanked Egypt and Qatar for their “critical leadership and partnership” in reaching the deal. He added: “And I appreciate the commitment that Prime Minister [Benjamin] Netanyahu and his government have made in supporting an extended pause to ensure this deal can be fully carried out and to ensure the provision of additional humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of innocent Palestinian families in Gaza … It is important that all aspects of this deal be fully implemented.
“Today’s deal should bring home additional American hostages, and I will not stop until they are all released.”
The senior US official said: “The deal has ultimately been structured to incentivise releases beyond 50”, adding that the agreement “is now structured for women and children in the first phase, but with an expectation for further releases”.
A statement from the Israeli prime minister’s office said the “lull” in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. It did not say when the ceasefire would start, though in his address to his cabinet, Benjamin Netanyahu said the first hostages should be free within 48 hours of the agreement.
Qatar’s foreign ministry said early on Wednesday that the start time of the deal would be announced in the next 24 hours and that the ceasefire will “allow the entry of a larger number of humanitarian convoys and relief aid, including fuel designated for humanitarian needs”.
Hamas confirmed an agreement had been reached, calling it a “humanitarian truce” in which 150 Palestinian women and children would be freed from Israeli jails. The militant movement said that expanded humanitarian deliveries were also part of the agreement, as well as a halt to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza during the four-day pause, with sorties over northern Gaza restricted to six hours a day. According to the Hamas statement, Israel agreed not to arrest anyone in Gaza for the duration of the temporary truce.
“The Israeli government is committed to the return of all abductees home,” the government statement said.. “Tonight, the government approved the outline for the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 abductees — women and children — will be released for four days, during which there will be a lull in the fighting. The release of every 10 additional abductees will result in an additional day of respite.”
The statement added: “The government of Israel, the IDF [Israel Defence Forces] and the security services will continue the war in order to return home all of the hostages, complete the elimination of Hamas and ensure that there will be no new threat to the State of Israel from Gaza.”
The Israeli confirmation of the agreement followed an extended meeting of the full 38-member Israeli cabinet over the terms, in the face of opposition from far right-wingers.
The debate ended shortly before 3am in Tel Aviv. Before the government vote, Netanyahu, assured his cabinet that the security agencies all supported the hostage deal, and that it would not mean an end to the military campaign against Hamas, which Netanyahu said would resume after the ceasefire was over.
“We are at war, and we will continue the war,” Netanyahu said. “We will continue until we achieve all our goals.”
Israel has also agreed to allow more aid into Gaza, which is suffering an acute humanitarian crisis after seven weeks of relentless bombardment and blockade.
The deal is also thought to include visits by the Red Cross to remaining hostages and a distribution of medicine. 
The deal, struck after weeks of talks mediated by Qatar , comes more than six weeks after the conflict began on 7 October, when Hamas launched attacks from Gaza into southern Israel, killing at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and taking more than 240 people hostage.
More than 14,000 people have been killed in Gaza, according to the government media office in Gaza. Another 2,700 others are missing and believed to be buried under rubble.
Netanyahu, who has pledged to “crush” Hamas, made the announcement after Israel’s war cabinet was convened followed by meetings of the wider security cabinet and the full government.
Opening the final meeting, Netanyahu said the deal was a difficult decision but the right decision, claiming it had the full support of the security agencies. 
“They have made it completely clear in their professional assessment, that the security of our forces will be ensured during the pause and that the intelligence effort will be maintained in those days,” Netanyahu said. “They have made it clear that not only will the war effort not be harmed, it will enable the IDF [Israel Defence Forces] to prepare for the continuation of the fighting.”
Even as Netanyahu’s government discussed the deal, airstrikes continued in Gaza and Hamas fired rockets into Israel.
Netanyahu also said the intervention of US president Joe Biden had helped to improve the deal so that it included more hostages for fewer concessions.
If implemented, the agreement would still leave some 190 hostages in Gaza, of whom roughly half are thought to be military personnel.
Qatar, where Hamas has a political office, has been the main intermediary between Israel and the extremist Islamist organisation, though Egypt and others have played a role.
Not all of the hostages are being held by Hamas, with some in the hands of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a separate extremist faction, and criminals in Gaza, say Israeli and other officials.
Most hostages are Israeli, but almost half of the hostages have dual nationality , including from Argentina, Germany, America, France, Thailand, Nepal and Russia. Hospitals in Israel have been prepared to receive those released, Israeli media reported.
The deal is a significant propaganda coup for Hamas and a personal victory for Yahya Sinwar, the Hamas leader in Gaza , who spent 23 years in Israeli prisons before being released in an exchange in 2011. Sinwar tops Israel’s hitlist and his whereabouts are unknown.
Ensuring that the terms of the deal are met from their side will require Hamas to ensure that all 50 hostages reach the borders of Gaza safely, a major logistical challenge. The group previously indicated  during negotiations that they were unaware of the exact location of every hostage due to the varied groups holding them across the territory.
Netanyahu will now be under domestic pressure to get the rest of the hostages freed but faces growing political risks. Several far-right parties that are part of the ruling coalition on Tuesday evening opposed the proposed deal and called for the Israeli offensive in Gaza to be intensified to secure better terms. Their statements prompted protests in Tel Aviv by hostages families.
Israeli officials have suggested that the hostages to be released in coming days will be selected from those held by Hamas, which will then try to locate others held by different groups or factions.
The armed wing of the Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad announced late on Tuesday the death of one of the Israeli hostages it has been holding.
Two Americans and two Israeli nationals were freed in mid-October by Hamas. The Israeli military last month rescued one of its soldiers, and last week it said it had recovered the bodies of two hostages during the offensive.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Gaza hostage deal: what do we know?
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 3:49 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:4
Length: 657 words
Byline: Dan Sabbagh and Julian Borger
Highlight: What has been agreed between Israel and Hamas, why has a deal been reached now, how many hostages will be freed, and what happens next?
Body


                   What has been agreed?                   
Fifty women and children held hostage by Hamas and other groups in Gaza since 7 October are to be released in exchange for a four-day ceasefire  in a deal brokered by Qatar with the support of the US.
A US official said three Americans would be among those freed, including a girl who turns four this week, and that the first release should come by Thursday.
According to Hamas, Israel will release 150 Palestinian prisoners, all women and children, from Israeli jails and allow hundreds of aid trucks a day to cross the Rafah border with Egypt, providing humanitarian supplies to Palestinians in Gaza.
Israel will cease air sorties in southern Gaza and restrict them to six hours a day in the north, according to the Hamas account of the deal, which also says Israeli forces will not bring military vehicles into Gaza during the ceasefire, nor try to detain anyone.
The ceasefire would be extended by a day for every 10 additional hostages released, the Israeli government said.
The agreement temporarily pauses a war that has lasted more than six weeks so far. It has cost the lives of 14,128 Palestinians in Gaza, according to the government media office in Gaza, and more than 1,200 people in Israel, most of whom were victims of the surprise Hamas cross-border attack on 7 October.
                   Why has an agreement been reached now?                   
Israel’s government has come under intense pressure domestically  to make progress on returning hostages. Their families mounted a high-profile “bring them home” campaign, meeting members of the Israeli war cabinet on Monday night. The military assault on northern Gaza had resulted in only one hostage being rescued alive.
International pressure has also been mounting in response to the increasingly desperate humanitarian situation in Gaza.  Bombing by the Israeli military followed by the ground invasion have caused a civilian crisis: food, water, fuel and medicines are desperately short, 1.7 million people out of 2.3 million  have been displaced, and only 10 out of 36 hospitals are functioning.
Last week, 68% of Americans said they supported a ceasefire , reflecting concerns in the US that Israel had gone too far in its military response.
Hamas is losing ground on the battlefield, as Israel’s forces have been able to capture large parts of northern Gaza, including Gaza City. Israel’s military claims to have inflicted heavy losses on 10 out of 24 Hamas battalions  and its leadership is believed to have relocated to the southern end of the Gaza Strip.
                   Will fighting restart once the ceasefire is over?                   
Hamas is likely to want to use any ceasefire to regroup, and it is possible it could seek to extend it by offering to gradually release more of the hostages. Israel has vowed to eliminate Hamas, so its survival as a group would represent a victory.
Israel has greater motives to return to the battlefield. The Israeli military has not yet occupied all of northern Gaza. On Tuesday, it had surrounded Jabalia, which it considers a Hamas stronghold, and the nearby Indonesian hospital, the only functioning large medical facility in the north.
Israeli commanders are also focused on the south of Gaza, and in particular the city of Khan Younis, where they believe Hamas’s leadership is based and the remaining hostages may be held. Some in the Israeli military establishment argue that delivering a knockout blow to Hamas would require attacking the city, though it would kill and displace even more civilians in an already crowded country.
The US has made clear it will not support a ground offensive in the south, unless there are much greater safeguards against civilian casualties. 
Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, told the cabinet, in remarks that were also filmed and broadcast, that he expected fighting to restart. “We will not stop after the ceasefire,” he said.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




The Gaza truce is a ray of hope in the darkness. Both sides must remember that
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 4:40 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:2
Length: 942 words
Byline: Martin Kettle
Highlight: The deal divided the Israeli cabinet, and likely Hamas too – for now it suits their interests, but this is a very fragile pause
Body


Observing events from outside the region, one habitually hesitates. Nevertheless, it feels clear that the four-day truce  between Hamas and Israel, with the exchange of prisoners that is woven into it, is better than what preceded it.
It will bring home some abducted Israelis and will save some Palestinian lives, though not enough in either case. It involves the kind of political concessions without which conflict becomes endless. It is a cheering success for the diplomacy that brokered it. It brings a pause. And it is a precedent.
All this is so obviously true that the people of the region, and most of the world’s governments, will inevitably breathe a collective sigh of relief if Thursday’s 10am start to the truce, now delayed by at least 24 hours, passes off smoothly. But it feels equally clear that the significance and durability of the truce should not be overstated. Its terms are extremely contingent. All sorts of things could go wrong, hour by hour, handover by handover, and become pretexts for renewed brutality.
The truce’s elaborately choreographed conditionality makes it an accident waiting to happen. Hopefully, those who negotiated it have put contingency plans in place to stop a glitch from spiralling into a breakdown. But the truce will not end the agonies of some of those who are suffering most. Nor will it allay the suspicions of those on both sides who oppose it. The deal offers no guarantees at all for the future. And Israel and Hamas have explicitly pledged to resume the conflict.
Even so, a truce offers hope. Many will naturally clutch at that. But the limitations should not be shirked. The deal divided the Israeli cabinet. It will probably divide Hamas, too. Those who oppose it will seek to undermine it, perhaps by lethal means. The longer the hostage release process is dragged out, the tougher it will become to complete it. If the process gets that far, its final days will be even more tense than these first days already are.
Consider, if nothing else, the emotional suffering written into the evolution of this deal, even if all goes to plan. The first releases  will reportedly be of 10 Israeli women and children, and of 30 Palestinian detainees. The joy and tears of the hostages and their relatives will be beamed around the world. A similar set of exchanges is expected to be repeated over the following days. Yet, for every family that rejoices, there will be many more who cannot do so, families for whom the wait will daily get longer, the stress of uncertainty greater. If these releases continue, as the Americans say is incentivised by the deal, the process  will become a game of Russian roulette with their lives.
That is not a reason not to try. Far from it. But it underscores the vulnerability of the process. Right now, both sides undoubtedly have incentives to pause the fighting. Israel wants its people back, and prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has bowed to pressure from hostages’ families and from his security chiefs to pick up a deal that he rejected in the past. Hamas presumably wants to regroup, to re-equip and to redeploy after the battering of Gaza.
But do they both want the process to continue for long? The reality is that both also have incentives to restart fighting. Hamas because, after years in which the world turned away from it and in which oil-rich Arab states began making peace with Israel, the organisation’s vicious assaults have made the world pay attention to Palestine once more. Israel because Netanyahu knows that, after his failures helped pave the way for the horror of 7 October, he faces being ousted  from office and prosecuted for corruption as soon as the conflict comes to an end.
I make no claim to military expertise, but it seems more likely than not that the war will in fact restart. Even before the 7 October attack , Israel and Hamas had been fighting a prolonged low-intensity conflict for years. Nearly seven weeks later, neither has got close to their ostensible war aims of destroying the other altogether. Israel has pulverised Gaza, but it has not yet shown the world that it has found, destroyed or expelled Hamas’s military nucleus. Hamas has committed an unconscionable massacre, but it has conspicuously failed to rouse the rest of the region to its banner.
If war is the extension of politics by other means, then today’s mutual military failure reflects a mutual political failure, too. The 30-year refusal of both sides to cooperate to deliver a two-state solution is as reprehensible as its now monumentally dire consequences, which include the Israeli settlements and the sleazy enfeeblement of Palestinian politics. These consequences are now so deeply rooted that it seems no amount of ingenious heavyweight diplomacy could really overcome them.
Yet this is the question that the truce at least places on the table. Whether it can be answered better than in the past depends on three huge and highly uncertain things: the ability of Joe Biden’s United States to drive a comprehensive deal before a presidential election that Donald Trump (whom Netanyahu supports) may win; the availability of Gulf money to bankroll and buttress the reconstruction of a new Palestinian state; and the readiness of Israelis and Palestinians to decide to do the very opposite of what Netanyahu and Hamas want. The last of these is the key. The two sides must listen to one another’s grievances and try to end them. It is hard to be hopeful. But there may not be another chance to try.
                                                               Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist                                                         

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Secrecy and public anger: how the Israel/Hamas ceasefire deal came about
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 11:10 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 1480 words
Byline: Julian Borger in Washington, Jason Burke in Jerusalem, and Ruth Michaelson in Istanbul
Highlight: Increasing pressure from the US and from the families of Israeli hostages were vital in securing agreement for the four-day truce
Body


The hostage deal that was finally agreed by the Israeli cabinet in the early hours of Wednesday was very similar in outline to what was on the table a month ago , according to sources familiar with the discussions.
In the intervening weeks, a lot has happened to turn the proposal to exchange women and children prisoners during a ceasefire into a near-reality.
Israel has mounted a ground offensive, seizing control of much of northern Gaza, and sending Hamas underground. The Israeli Defense Forces are now open to a tactical pause while decisions are made about how to move southwards.
Meanwhile, the government of Benjamin Netanyahu has been under acute and mounting pincer pressure: from the Biden administration, and internally from the hostages’ families and their sympathisers, who have waged a relentless public campaign to put the captives’ lives first.
The first sign that Hamas was interested in a hostage deal came only a few days after its 7 October attack in which its gunmen killed 1,200 Israelis and took about 240 captive. The government in Qatar approached the White House to convey Hamas’s interest in negotiations, and suggested that a dedicated cell be set up involving a handful of US, Qatari and Israeli representatives, according to senior US officials.
Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, designated his Middle East coordinator, Brett McGurk, and Josh Geltzer, deputy White House counsel, to set up the cell, which was kept secret from the rest of the administration on Israeli and Qatari insistence.
Biden and his team were focused in particular on 10 US nationals who had not been accounted for and were presumed to be among the hostages. On 13 October, the US president held a Zoom call with their families. A senior administration official said colleagues on the call described it as “one of the most gut-wrenching things they’ve experienced in their time here”.
When Biden visited Israel five days later, he met the families of hostages in person, and their release was a main focus of his face-to-face meeting with Netanyahu, according to US officials. Three Americans were included in the final deal on Wednesday.
Alongside Biden’s personal commitment, the White House came to see the hostage issue as the most likely route to persuading the Israeli government to ease its onslaught on Gaza,  which had flattened entire residential districts and killed thousands of Palestinian civilians.
In a bid to build confidence, Hamas released two American hostages on 20 October  and two Israelis four days later. Sullivan, McGurk and Sullivan’s deputy tracked the progress of the two Americans, Judith Raanan and her teenage daughter, Natalie, over several hours. For the Americans it was a “proof of concept” showing that Qatar could deliver the release of hostages as promised through the joint cell.
After the initial hostage release, the Israelis authorised the Mossad director, David Barnea, as their lead negotiator, who worked with his US counterpart, William Burns, on the parameters of a larger deal. On 25 October, the Hamas leader in Gaza, Yahya Sinwar,  signalled that he was ready to free all the children, women, elderly and sick among the estimated 240 hostages, in exchange for a greater number of Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli jails as well a five-day ceasefire.
Israel was just two days away from unleashing its ground offensive. Hundreds of tanks were massed along Gaza’s borders with 350,000 reservists called up. US and Israeli officials debated whether the assault should be delayed to give the offered deal a chance.
Netanyahu’s government argued there was not enough substance to the Hamas offer, pointing out there still was no proof of life of any of the hostages. The Americans agreed, but according to US officials, the ground offensive plan was adapted to be carried out in phases so that it could be paused if a deal came together.
Once the ground offensive had been launched, Sinwar repeated his offer, even suggesting that he would accept a shorter ceasefire, and publicly voiced his readiness for a deal on 28 October. Netanyahu remained cautious, keenly aware at the time that any deal would split his rightwing coalition and possibly bring down his government, or at least strengthen the hand of centrists who had joined the war effort after the 7 October attack.
After the bombing of the Jabalia refugee camp over three days  from 31 October to 2 November caused mass Palestinian casualties, Hamas temporarily cut off talks, but its boycott only lasted a few days. Communications would be cut again after the Israeli raid on al-Shifa hospital. Even when Sinwar was ready to talk, the dialogue was slow, a US official said, because he passed messages on handwritten notes rather than risking electronic communications.
From the beginning of November, splits were clearly widening in the Israeli security establishment. Barnea and Burns visited Doha for a meeting with the Qatari prime minister, Mohammed al-Thani, but the sticking point for the Israelis remained the absence of a list of people whom Hamas claimed to be holding.
Hamas argued it was not able to produce all those details without a lull in the fighting. Many of the hostages, it appeared, were being held by other groups such as Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Gaza’s criminal clans, and were no longer under direct Hamas control.
The Qataris and intelligence chiefs also discussed the possibility of fuel shipments into Gaza, long resisted by Israel on the grounds that they would diverted by Hamas, and the idea of piecemeal deals involving the release of 10 to 15 hostages for operational pauses of a few days, but Netanyahu’s government wanted a bigger deal if it was to do a deal at all.
On 12 November, Biden called the emir of Qatar, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, in a bid to break the deadlock, and insisted that some sort of identifying information had to be produced. Shortly after this call, Hamas produced data on the first 50 hostages it said would be freed in the first phase of any deal.
Over the course of November, Washington steadily built up the pressure on Netanyahu to do a deal, making sure a constant stream of US officials was visiting Tel Aviv. “We are going to keep in their face,” a US diplomat said at the time.
Publicly, the administration toughened its tone on the humanitarian consequences of the Israeli offensive, broke with Netanyahu by insisting that the Palestinian Authority run Gaza after the war, and declared the imposition of visa bans on Israeli settlers implicated in violence towards Palestinians on the West Bank.
“What really got everyone’s attention was the signal that there would be potential repercussions for the settlers,” a source familiar with the negotiations said.
On Tuesday, the US national security spokesperson, John Kirby, said the administration would not support the extension of the Israeli military campaign to southern Gaza “absent a clearly articulated plan for how they’re going to protect the lives of the hundreds of thousands of people that have now added to the population in the south because they were asked to leave by the Israelis”.
By mid-November, the Americans were pushing at an open door, as Netanyahu became more receptive. When the White House Middle East coordinator, Brett McGurk, visited the prime minister on 15 November, a senior US official said, Netanyahu grabbed him by the arm and said: “We need this deal.”
The political calculus in Israel had changed as the hostages’ relatives steadily became more vocal and more effective inside Israel, culminating in a televised shouting match with the far-right ministry of national security, Itamar Ben-Gvir, which helped to isolate the extremists, clearing the way for a cabinet vote in favour of the deal on Wednesday morning.
“I think the families did the heavy lifting,” said Daniel Levy, president of the US/Middle East Project.
“What went on was that the families over time were convinced that the focus of their action had to be at home, that the place they needed to tip that had the power of decision-making was their own government.”
The final text was hammered out in Doha on 18 November between McGurk and prime minister al-Thani, who passed a text on to Hamas. The next day McGurk went to Cairo to meet the Egyptian intelligence chief, Abbas Kamel, to receive Hamas’s response and make last-minute tweaks.
The current deal can be extended; an extra day of ceasefire will be added for every 10 further hostages that Hamas releases. US diplomats say they are hopeful that the pause can be used to significantly address the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza. The Qataris, meanwhile, say they are hopeful that it could lead to a long-term ceasefire.
“That is probably unrealistic,” said a source who has been in regular contact with Doha. “Everyone else we talk to believes that after this break, it will get a lot worse.”

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Hopes for a permanent ceasefire in Gaza and Israel
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 5:48 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 593 words
Highlight: Readers respond to an article by Jonathan Freedland on the nature of Hamas and Benjamin Netanyahu, and to an article by Raja Shehadeh
Body


I regularly read Jonathan Freedland’s perceptive articles and appreciate his informed perspective. May I take issue with his contention that many of those who have been advocating a ceasefire in Gaza are making mistaken assumptions that lead them to draw false and dangerous conclusions ( Too many taking sides in this conflict miss the true nature of Hamas – and Netanyahu, 17 November  ). He claims they believe that “given all that Gaza has suffered, surely now Hamas will be deterred from future attacks”.
Israelis who have been calling for a ceasefire, I among them, harbour no such illusions about Hamas. We oppose further destruction of Gaza and the horrendous loss of life first of all, because we find it deeply immoral. Can this really be justified by Hamas’s unspeakable atrocities? And second, because these actions are counterproductive – they exacerbate the conflict, and have very likely delayed and complicated an agreement to release our hostages.
Golda Meir is reputed to have said  : “We can forgive the Arabs for killing our children. We cannot forgive them for forcing us to kill their children.” This sentiment is sadly still so pervasive here in Israel. The population of Gaza is suffering? It’s all Hamas’s fault, they should have known what was coming to them. As if mighty Israel were merely the passive instrument of Hamas’s evil machinations. Until we accept some responsibility for our actions, the prospect for peace remains bleak. Avner GreenbergKfar Vradim, Israel
 In an otherwise informative article, it is a little difficult to believe that Jonathan Freedland is seriously suggesting that the US administration, and Israel’s other allies, are unaware that Benjamin Netanyahu and his coalition are utterly opposed to a two-state solution. Tragically, a two-state solution seems beyond the current horizon, while the world is consumed with the aftermath of Hamas’s terror attack, Israel’s response, and the disagreements over calling for humanitarian pauses or a permanent ceasefire.
Regarding a ceasefire, can we look back to the precedent of 1982? Hillel Schenker, co-editor of the Palestine-Israel Journal, has made a proposal on the Times of Israel  ’s website, arising from years of active involvement in the struggle for peace. His proposal is for a ceasefire founded essentially on the following conditions:
(1) The exit of the Hamas leadership, perhaps to Qatar, similar to the exit of Yasser Arafat and the PLO leadership to Tunis in 1982 during the first Lebanon war.
(2) An exchange of all Israeli hostages for Palestinian prisoners currently held in Israeli jails.
(3) The creation of an interim international regime to rule over Gaza, organised by perhaps the US, European countries, UN agencies and Arab governments, this regime being a necessary precursor to a new Palestinian government in Gaza. Prof Stephen OginLondon
 Raja Shehadeh’s article about the failure of Israel to achieve a just peace after the six-day war ( Israel has long wanted Palestinians out of Gaza – my father saw it firsthand, 20 November  ) fails to mention the Khartoum resolution of 1 September 1967, which emerged from a summit of all the Arab heads of state. This declared that the framework of principles governing Arab collective action would include “no peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel, no negotiations with it”. This gives a clearer context than anything in his article for Israel’s belief that its continued survival required it to retain control over the extra territory it had acquired in 1967. Prof Rowland WymerCambridge

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




The Guardian view on a ceasefire in Gaza: a step forward, but this is far from over
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 7:08 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:3
Length: 640 words
Byline: Editorial
Highlight: Although the release of hostages and a pause in violence are essential in such desperate times, this is not a lasting solution
Body


The ceasefire and hostage release deal  between Israel and Hamas will be deeply felt. To some, it will mean everything. If it proceeds as agreed, the families of 50 women and children of Israeli and other nationalities, held hostage by Hamas since its murderous raids on 7 October, will at last be reunited with their loved ones – with the first release expected on Friday at the earliest. For traumatised families in Gaza, the deal will bring respite from relentless airstrikes and the prospect of desperately needed aid. It will also see the release of 150 Palestinian women and children from Israeli prisons.
There has been talk of such an arrangement for weeks. There is fury among relatives that hostages have ranked so low on Benjamin Netanyahu’s list of priorities: the Israeli prime minister did not meet family members until this week.  Hamas refused to provide identifying information  on hostages and threatened to cut talks over Israel’s raid on al-Shifa hospital. In the intervening time, several hostages have died, and thousands more Palestinians. Another 100 people in Gaza were killed within hours  of the deal being announced.
Nonetheless, the hope is that this brings, however belatedly, a critical change in dynamics. The deal, brokered by Qatar and the US, includes an option to extend the four-day ceasefire if more hostages are released. The sight of family reunions, and the suffering of hostages, might build support in Israel for a longer-term deal. A fuller picture of the devastation in Gaza, through access for outside journalists, is likely to increase international pressure. 
What this does not mean is an end to the war.  Almost 200 hostages will still be held. Martin Griffiths, the UN humanitarian chief, describes  the situation in Gaza as “the worst ever … complete and utter carnage”. Two-fifths of the estimated 14,000 dead are children, and 1.7 million people have been displaced – three-quarters of Gaza’s population. The emergency effort can offer only very limited relief: Oxfam called the deal “a Band-Aid that will be ripped off a bleeding wound after four days”. The Israel Defense Forces say that it is an “operational pause”, not a ceasefire, and Mr Netanyahu has stressed: “We’ll continue in the war.” Hamas insists  : “Our hands will remain on the trigger.”
The same forces that delayed this deal will work against its extension. Hamas will seek a higher price for the remaining hostages. Mr Netanyahu is fighting for political survival. While he carried this proposal  with the support of some of the extremists in his cabinet, the national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, attacked it as “immoral”. Israel continues to state that its goal is eliminating Hamas. There is no sign that Israeli political opinion is cohering around a plan for what may come after the war  – still less any indication that the necessary international parties would sign up.
If matters proceed as arranged, however, it may at least lead to a longer-term diminution of the assault on Gaza. The Biden administration has already made it clear that it will not stomach a full-scale expansion of Israeli operations into the south. The offensive might resume at a lower intensity and continue indefinitely. Though this would be better than the 160 children  that the UN estimates have been killed each day, no one could celebrate it. This agreement is to be welcomed. It must be made to work and, if possible, built upon. But its limitations must be fully understood.
                                                                   Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters  section, please click here.                                                                                 

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Harvard journal accused of censoring article alleging genocide in Gaza
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 9:31 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: EDUCATION; Version:2
Length: 860 words
Byline: Robert Tait in Washington
Highlight: Harvard Law Review declined an essay by Palestinian doctoral candidate Rabea Eghbariah after it had been initially approved
Body


A prestigious journal published by Harvard Law School has been accused of censorship after it refused to publish an academic article accusing Israel of committing genocide in Gaza, allegedly because editors feared a backlash.
The Harvard Law Review, which is run by the school’s student body, declined the 2,000-word essay – titled The Ongoing Nakba: Towards a Legal Framework for Palestine – by a Palestinian doctoral candidate, Rabea Eghbariah, after it had been edited, fact-checked and initially approved.
The article, commissioned after Hamas’s 7 October attack on Israel, followed by an Israeli assault on Gaza, would have been the first by a Palestinian scholar ever published by the review. The Intercept originally broke the story.
It argued that events in Gaza – where more than 14,000 Palestinians have been killed since Israel launched its military offensive – met the terms of genocide as defined by the United Nations convention. The article also called for a legally recognised crime of “Nakba” (catastrophe), the Arab word used to describe the forced removal of Palestinians from their homes at the time of Israel’s founding in 1948.
But plans to publish it as a blogpost were abandoned after a crisis meeting of more than 100 editors. The rejection was reportedly driven by fears that publication might harm editors’ career prospects by provoking a backlash that could include having their personal details disclosed in an attempt at public shaming, a process known as “doxxing.”
Working on the review is a well-trodden path for law school students, who later advance to high-flying careers in politics, elite law firms, and clerkships at the US supreme court. Barack Obama served as the review’s president during his time as a Harvard law student.
The decision was criticised in a statement issued by 25 editors, who said such a rejection was unprecedented and motivated by fear.
“At a time when the Law Review was facing a public intimidation and harassment campaign, the journal’s leadership intervened to stop publication,” they wrote, according to the Intercept. “The body of editors – none of whom are Palestinian – voted to sustain that decision. We are unaware of any other solicited piece that has been revoked by the Law Review in this way.”
The review’s editor, Apsara Iyer, told Eghbariah, in an email that the decision “was not based on your identity or viewpoint”.
However, a separate email written by an online editor, Tascha Shahriari-Parsa, and reported by the Nation suggested otherwise.
“The discussion did not involve any substantive or technical aspects of your piece,” Shahriari-Parsa told Eghbariah. “Rather, [it] revolved around concerns about editors who might oppose or be offended by the piece, as well as concerns that the piece might provoke a reaction from members of the public who might in turn harass, dox or otherwise attempt to intimidate our editors, staff and HLR leadership.”
In response, Eghabriah, a human rights attorney, complained to editors that the decision amounted to “discrimination” and “outright censorship”.
The article was eventually published by the Nation under the headline The Harvard Law Review Refused to Run This Piece About Genocide in Gaza.
In it, Eghbariah cites several scholars who argue that Israeli actions meet legal criteria for genocide, before adding: “And yet, leading law schools and legal scholars in the United States still fashion their silence as impartiality and their denial as nuance.
“Palestine is where genocide can be performed as a fight of ‘ the civilised world  ’ against the ‘enemies of civilization’ itself. When contrasted with Jewish-Israeli life – the ultimate victims  of European genocidal ideologies – Palestinians stand no chance at humanisation. ”
Noting that genocide was enshrined into the UN charter and international law due to the crimes of the Holocaust, he envisions a similar legally defined outcome for Palestinian experiences. “We must imagine that one day there will be a recognised crime of committing a Nakba, and a disapprobation of Zionism as an ideology based on racial elimination ,” he concludes.
The controversy over the article follows a series of rows that have engulfed Harvard and other universities in the wake of Hamas’s assault, which led to the killing of 1,200 people and the kidnapping of around 240 others.
Larry Summers, a former Harvard president and US treasury secretary, denounced the university for failing to condemn an open letter left by a pro-Palestinian student group in the campus’s main courtyard in the immediate aftermath of the atrocities that put the blame on Israel.
“In nearly 50 years of @Harvard affiliation, I have never been as disillusioned and alienated as I am today,” he tweeted. He said the letter and university officials’ failure to condemn it “allowed Harvard to appear at best neutral towards acts of terror against the Jewish state of Israel”.
His criticism prompted the current Harvard president, Claudine Gay, to publicly condemn Hamas’s “barbaric atrocities”. But she rejected calls to name and punish students who signed the open letter, saying the university “embraces a commitment to free expression”.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Gaza ceasefire deal brings relief but little hope of durable peace
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 12:54 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 790 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Israeli military and intelligence services reported to have backed deal but are clearly committed to continuing efforts to ‘crush’ HamasIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Very many people – in Israel, the occupied territories, the Middle East and well beyond – will feel immense relief at the news of a ceasefire and hostage deal. 
But the provisional nature of the pause in the Israeli offensive into Gaza combined with the number of captives remaining with Hamas mean any hopes of a definitive end to hostilities remain tragically slender.
The consequences of the agreement are already rippling out across the region and beyond, but those most immediately affected will be the people of Gaza.
So far, between 13,000 and 14,000 Palestinians are thought to have been killed since Israel launched its offensive after the 7 October Hamas attacks that killed 1,200 in southern Israel, mostly civilians in their homes or at a dance party.
Much of the north of Gaza has been made uninhabitable by the Israeli bombardment, and 1.7 million people displaced. All are now crammed into the south, which has been without adequate food, fuel, clean water, shelter and much else for almost seven weeks after Israel cut off supplies.
Any cessation of hostilities and promises of increased aid will provide only very partial relief to the shattered, battered, grieving inhabitants of the the territory.
One UN official who has spent six weeks living in a compound near Khan Younis, in southern Gaza, with his family, told the Guardian on Wednesday: “I wish that once the ceasefire starts its opens the way for political solution, but it’s not clear yet …. It also it makes us think: what are we going to do when the war ends? Where to go when most of the people, and I am one of them, have lost their home? Where to live, when there is no infrastructure, no schools, no hospitals? It would take years just to remove the rubble.” 
The deal will also provide only partial relief to the families of those 239 mainly Israeli hostages thought to be in Gaza. Even for families whose relatives are not immediately released, the deal offers hope. But for the families and friends of captured military personnel, possibly numbering about 100, there is the deeply distressing knowledge that these are the most valuable to Hamas and so will be the last to be freed. 
Ofri Bibas Levy, whose brother, sister-in-law and two nephews – aged four and 10 months – are among the captives, said the deal puts families in an “inhumane” situation. Her brother, 34, is not expected to be among the first groups released.
“Who will be released, who won’t? Will the kids be freed? Will they be freed with their mothers or not?” she said, shortly before the deal was announced. “No matter which way it happens, there will still be families that will remain worried and sad and angry.”
Though far-right parties largely supported the deal, averting an immediate political crisis, many in Israel oppose the ceasefire. The Israeli military and intelligence services are reported to have backed the agreement with Hamas – despite the propaganda coup it hands their bitter enemy – but are clearly committed, like most of the public, to continuing the effort to “crush” Hamas.
Even as the deal was being debated in Israel, an airstrike hit a residential building in the southern town of Khan Younis, killing 17 people, witnesses reported. An Associated Press reporter saw the bodies of two children pulled from the rubble, one badly burned.
On Wednesday morning, the apps that many Israelis use to warn of incoming rocket fire from Gaza also sounded.
A military official told the Guardian last month that he and his colleagues had always known Israel would have to pay “a painful price” for the return of the hostages, but the heroic status that Hamas will win by forcing the release of young and female prisoners from Israeli jails is a bitter pill nonetheless.
Israel claims to have killed thousands of Hamas fighters, although it has not presented evidence, and destroyed parts of the group’s tunnel system. It also controls swaths of Hamas’s former strongholds in northern Gaza.
But it is clear that much of Hamas’s infrastructure is intact, and any pause will give the militants a chance to regroup. The Israeli military says 68 soldiers have been killed in ground operations – and the job of eliminating the threat from Hamas is incomplete.
Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, promised ministers and coalition partners sceptical of the deal that the military offensive would continue “with full force” after the ceasefire ends in four or five days.
Yahya Sinwar, the Hamas leader in Gaza, has been described as a “dead man walking” by Israeli ministers but is still, apparently, sufficiently alive to give his final and deciding consent to the deal. The combination of Israeli rhetoric and Sinwar’s longevity does not make a durable peace appear likely soon.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Celtic fined for fans’ Palestinian flags during Champions League game
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 1:54 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: SPORT; Version:2
Length: 228 words
Byline: Reuters and Guardian sport
Highlight: Club fined £15,200 by Uefa after Atlético Madrid gameFlags ‘provocative’ says statement from governing body
Body


Celtic have been fined £15,200 after their fans waved Palestinian flags during their Champions League match against Atlético Madrid  last month in Glasgow.
The flags, which numbered in the hundreds, were deemed to be “provocative messages of an offensive nature”, Uefa said in a statement.
Fans, who had been warned by Celtic before the game on 25 October not to display flags, could be heard singing “You’ll Never Walk Alone” while holding the Palestinian flags in a video shared widely on Instagram. Supporters also unfurled two large banners that read “Free Palestine” and “Victory to the Resistance”.
Gaza’s Hamas-run government says at least 14,100 Palestinians have been killed, thousands of them children, in the war with Israel. The war began on 7 October, when Hamas launched attacks from Gaza into southern Israel, killing at least 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and taking more than 240 people hostage.
Celtic are fourth in Champions League Group E on one point after four games. They were also fined £10,000 for fans blocking passageways and using pyrotechnics.
The club – who have been at loggerheads with the Green Brigade fan group recently, following a string of disputes and flashpoints – have told supporters travelling to Rome for next Tuesday’s Champions League match against Lazio that all flags, banners and drums must be pre-approved by the Italian club.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




West risks being complicit in Israeli war crimes, warn Arab and Muslim foreign ministers
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 1:42 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:4
Length: 912 words
Byline: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor
Highlight: Delegation says west is allowing collective punishment of people of Gaza unless it demands Israel allow more aid into territory Israel-Hamas war – live updates
Body


The western powers on the UN security council face a choice of either demanding Israel lift its stranglehold on humanitarian aid into Gaza or being complicit in Israeli war crimes and collective punishment, foreign ministers from Arab and Muslim countries said on a visit to London on Wednesday.
The ministers are lobbying the five permanent members of the security council – China, France, Russia, the UK, and the US – to back a humanitarian resolution instructing Israel to allow UN agencies, and not the Israel Defense Forces, to check aid going through the Rafah crossing from Egypt to Gaza. They say the proposal is in line with practice in Syria, and reflects their concern that Israel is determined to depopulate Gaza slowly by making it uninhabitable.
The call came as the head of Unicef, Catherine Russell, told the UN security council that the Gaza Strip was now “the most dangerous place on earth to be a child” , adding that four-day humanitarian pauses were not sufficient to “put a stop to this carnage”. A consortium of aid agencies also questioned what could be delivered to Gaza during the truce, due to start on Thursday.
The group of foreign ministers, from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, Indonesia, Turkey, Nigeria and Palestine, were in London for talks with the foreign secretary, David Cameron, before seeing the French president, Emmanuel Macron, later on Wednesday. They had already been to Beijing and Moscow.
At a briefing in London they also called for the imminent humanitarian pause to be extended to a total and permanent cessation of hostilities.
The Saudi foreign minister, Faisal bin Farhan al Saud, said: “It is absolutely necessary. It is in our opinion that we transition from temporary to an extended ceasefire and go from there.”
Presenting the plan for the UN to take charge of the screening of aid entering Gaza – like the procedure that takes place at Syrian border crossings – Al Saud said: “We are putting a choice in front of members of the security council. Are they going to be complicit in the starvation and deprivation of the people of Gaza or are they willing to enforce the basic principle that civilians must not be affected by a military conflict?”
He asked: “Is the security council going to live up to its absolute minimum of responsibilities to ensure the innocent citizens of Gaza get the food, the water, the medical supplies that they need or are they willing to be part of collective punishment?”
He said if the west rejected the appeals of 2 billion people in the Middle East it would send a significant message. He added: “I don’t think the international community can afford to alienate the countries of the Arab and Muslim world.”
The Jordanian foreign minister, Ayman Safadi, said there was a huge gap between the 200 aid trucks a day to be allowed over the Rafah crossing under the agreement and the 800 a day needed.
He said it was imperative that aid was allowed to reach the north of Gaza where there has been no water or food supplied since 7 November, and hospitals and health centres are unable to function.
The ministers also conveyed a broader political message to western capitals that unless they do more to restrain Israel, a new generation of extremists could be born.
They remain convinced that Israel is planning to funnel the people of Gaza into a small, southern section of the territory, designate it a “safe zone” and then bomb the remainder of the Gaza until Palestinians plead to leave the strip.
The UN has said they are against safe zones in principle based on historic experience, but the US envoy, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, told the UN security council that the US hoped Palestinians would move to safer areas.
The Egyptian foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, said: “The conditions are dismal, the displacement of people from north to south, the volume of people, the lack of shelter, sanitation, the risks of disease spreading … and aid cannot be delayed or there will be further displacement – that is the unspoken objective of Israel.”
He added that every western statement saying a displacement policy was not acceptable “has to be followed up by actual measures”. The aid agencies at a briefing said Israel was trying to force people in Gaza to go to the southern town of Al-Mawasi.
“What are we as an international community doing to prevent displacement? If we continue on this road of restricting aid, there will be no recourse other than displacement,” he said.
He claimed: “In other conflicts the west has been categorical about what was happening so I do not see why in this instance there is a reluctance to call a spade a spade. There are a lot of statements saying the needs of international law must be respected, but not much evaluation of whether that need is being met or not.”
At briefings on Tuesday aid agencies said the four-day window to transport supplies into Gaza would only give them a chance to provide a drop in the ocean to 2 million people in need, but that they would concentrate on delivering medicines, food, water and tents.
Cameron told the Arab foreign ministers it was important that humanitarian organisations were able to transport more fuel into Gaza so they can carry out life-saving work – including powering hospitals or desalination plants, which supply 80% of Gaza’s water. The UK repeated its call, spurned by Israel, for priority to be given to improving land access, including by reopening the Kerem Shalom land crossing, so aid can be transported in at scale.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Over 100 Palestinians reported killed in Gaza as attack continues despite ceasefire deal
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 3:02 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:7
Length: 985 words
Byline: Dan Sabbagh in Jerusalem and Ruth Michaelson
Highlight: Houses in centre of strip said to have been targeted, killing 81, with 60 more believed dead in northIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


More than 100 Palestinians in Gaza – including 50 from one family – were reported killed on Wednesday as Israeli forces continued to attack across the strip from land, sea and air hours after agreement was reached for a ceasefire  to begin on Thursday.
Wafa, a Palestinian news agency, said 81 people had been killed since midnight as houses were targeted in the centre of the strip. A further 60 were believed to be dead after bombing in and around the Jabaliya refugee camp in the north.
Riyad al-Maliki, the Palestinian foreign minister, said during a visit to London that 52 of the victims at Jabaliya were from the same Qadoura family. “I have the list of the names, 52 of them. They were wiped out completely, from grandfather to grandchildren,” he said.
Deadly bombing was also reported at al-Nuseirat refugee camp, killing nine people. Casualty figures are difficult to verify given the ongoing fighting, although initial reports often turn out to be underestimates until the missing are accounted for.
The ceasefire was due to begin on Thursday morning, but it was announced on Wednesday evening neither the truce nor the hostage release would happen before Friday. An initial 150 people are expected to be freed in the four days, in return for the release of 50 hostages  held by Hamas and other groups. But there was little sign of a slowdown in the fighting on Wednesday.
Fighting continued around two hospitals in the north of the Gaza Strip, the Indonesia hospital  and the Kamal Adwan hospital in Beit Lahiya, amid IDF demands that they be evacuated so that the military can take control.
Medhat Abass, the director general of the health ministry in Gaza, said: “We fear for the lives of those inside Kamal Adwan, al-Awda and the Indonesian hospitals,” and earlier described the Indonesia hospital as “besieged”.
Abass distributed a message from Dr Essay Nabhan, the head of the nursing department, who said: “The hospital was transformed from a centre providing medical services into a mass grave. There are corpses in all of the departments, and we lost many lives due to the lack of supplies.”
Sixty corpses lay in front of the morgue, they added. There were plans to bury them inside the grounds of the hospital, as it was unsafe to leave the premises where hundreds sheltered fearfully inside.
At the Kamal Adwan hospital in Beit Lahiya, the lone hospital in operation at the northern part of the enclave, the director, Ahmed al-Kahlout, told Al Jazeera that “shelling and bombardment are increasing everywhere in the vicinity of the hospital”.
The hospital had received more than 60 bodies with over 200 injured since last night, he added. “The medical teams are very tired. We don’t have a single drop of fuel. We work in the dark using handheld searchlights,” he said.
In another message distributed by the health ministry, Kahlout said the hospital was using cooking oil rather than diesel to run the hospital’s generators, and an ambulance targeting the wounded had been struck near the hospital grounds.
Israel declined to comment on the fighting around the hospitals. Instead an Israel Defense Forces officer confirmed the military would continue its attacks until the ceasefire took effect.
Lt Col Richard Hecht, the IDF’s international spokesperson, told a briefing at lunchtime: “We still have probably, maybe a day-plus before this thing matures, and things can happen in that day. And I assume today is going to be a day of fighting in Gaza.” 
Israel’s troops pressed forward on the ground on Wednesday in an effort to gain control of as much territory as possible in northern Gaza before the halt in hostilities. Its forces encircled Jabaliya on Tuesday, where fighting was continuing, and on Wednesday called on residents of its old city and nearby Shuja’iya neighbourhood to evacuate south before 4pm.
Attacks were coming from the sea as well as by air and land. The IDF released black and white footage showing bombing from air and sea, plus a video of Israeli soldiers operating in a shattered urban landscape, clearing buildings at gunpoint and calling in airstrikes to attack nearby compounds.
The IDF has described the ceasefire as an “operational pause”, in line with comments overnight from the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu – a clear attempt to hint that bombing could resume after the hostage exchange is completed. “Our terminology is not ceasefire, our terminology is an operational pause,” Hecht said. 
Gaza’s health ministry said it was able to evacuate 320 of the wounded and their families from the Indonesia hospital to southern Gaza on Wednesday using ambulances, while the remaining wounded were also evacuated from al-Shifa hospital.
The IDF showed a group of reporters a reinforced shaft linked to a bathroom, kitchen and an air-conditioned meeting room that it said was part of an underground network of Hamas tunnels beneath al-Shifa.
The tunnel shaft, about two metres (6.5ft) high, was accessed through an outdoor shaft in the hospital complex grounds.
Israel has long accused Hamas of using the hospital complex as a command and control base, an allegation denied by the militant group and hospital officials. The reporters were not taken inside the hospital and were allowed to see only a portion of the tunnel.
Aid agencies meanwhile warned that the humanitarian crisis was so catastrophic as a result of the fighting that a four-day pause in hostilities would do little to alleviate the situation, and called for a permanent ceasefire.
Joël Weiler, executive director of the medical charity Médecins du Monde, said: “For a medical organisation, four days of pause is … Band-Aid, not healthcare.” Others warned that there were limitations on the amount of aid that could cross the border and the volume of fuel being made available as long as no extra crossing points were being opened beyond the existing Rafah facility on Gaza’s southern border with Egypt.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war opens up German debate over meaning of ‘Never again’
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 4:02 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 829 words
Byline: Philip Oltermann European culture editor
Highlight: Intellectuals clash over country’s traditional commitment to defence of Israel amid bloodshed in GazaIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


The phrase “Never again” has been the central tenet of Germany’s political identity since the horrors of the Nazi-led Holocaust of Europe’s Jewish population. But the war between Israel and Hamas has opened up a fiercely fought debate about the phrase’s true meaning, dividing opinion among followers of the dominant German intellectual tradition.
A letter published  in the Guardian pits several prominent German and international figures influenced by the Frankfurt School of neo-Marxist “critical theory” against its most prominent living member, Jürgen Habermas. They argue that “Never again” must also mean staying alert to the possibility that what is unfolding in Gaza could amount to genocide.
In a statement published on 13 November, Habermas made the case that the “Never again” principle must above all lead to a German commitment to protecting Jewish life and Israel’s right to exist.
Habermas, 94, sometimes described as a contemporary successor to the Enlightenment philosophers for his writing on themes of power and justice, argued that Israel’s military retaliation following the 7 October Hamas attacks was “justified in principle”. Likening the resulting bloodshed in Gaza to a genocide was beyond the boundaries of acceptable debate, he said.
“Despite all the concern for the fate of the Palestinian population […], the standards of judgment slip completely when genocidal intentions are attributed to Israel’s actions,” said the statement, which was also signed by the political scientist Rainer Forst, the lawyer Klaus Günther and the peace researcher Nicole Deitelhoff.
In response, the letter published on Wednesday echoes Habermas’s condemnation of the Hamas attack and hostage-taking, but expresses concern over the “apparent limits of the solidarity expressed” by the philosopher and his co-authors.
“The statement’s concern for human dignity is not adequately extended to Palestinian civilians in Gaza who are facing death and destruction,” it adds. “Nor is it applied or extended to Muslims in Germany experiencing rising Islamophobia. Solidarity means that the principle of human dignity must apply to all people. This requires us to recognise and address the suffering of all those affected by an armed conflict.”
The letter continues: “We are concerned that there is no mention of upholding international law, which also prohibits war crimes and crimes against humanity such as collective punishment, persecution, and the destruction of civilian infrastructure including schools, hospitals and places of worship.”
While “not all signatories believe that the legal standards for genocide have been met” by the situation in Gaza, the letter says, all of them “agree this is a matter of legitimate debate”.
On Sunday, a group of UN experts said there was “evidence of increasing genocidal incitement” against the Palestinian people. Israeli officials reject this.
The letter’s full list of more than 100 supporters  includes several academics who have either directly emerged from the Frankfurt School or are employed at New York’s New School for Social Research, which sees itself working within the same critical theory tradition.
Other signatories include the economist Adam Tooze, the legal historian Samuel Moyn, and the philosophers Amia Srinivasan and Nancy Fraser.
More than 1,200 people, mostly civilians, were killed by Hamas militants on 7 October. Since Israel’s counter-offensive was launched , more than 14,000 people have been killed in Gaza, according to Hamas-run health authorities.
On Wednesday , Israel and Hamas agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire.
Founded in 1923, the Frankfurt School applied Marxist theory to philosophy and social theory to make sense of the rise of fascism out of apparently liberal European societies. Habermas, a former assistant to Theodor Adorno, took a more optimistic stance than the institution’s founding members, seeking to build an intellectual framework for democratic societies operating within market capitalism.
Habermas’s letter reflects a strong, cross-party pro-Israel consensus in German politics. The to-and-fro of statements comes on the back of a motion for a resolution  put forward on 7 November by the three centre-left and liberal parties of Olaf Scholz’s coalition government, which proposes allowing the extradition of non-German citizenship holders who spread hatred against Jews, as well as withdrawing funding from cultural institutions that support the Boycott, Divest and Sanctions (BDS) movement.
Critics fear such a resolution would also result in the silencing of legitimate criticism of Israeli policies. In Berlin, the city senate is considering pulling funding for the Oyoun cultural centre in the German capital’s Neukölln district, after the centre’s directors reportedly refused to cancel a peace vigil by a leftwing Jewish group.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Netanyahu avoids political rebellion over Hamas hostage deal but ally calls it ‘immoral’
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 3:37 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 914 words
Byline: Peter Beaumont
Highlight: Israel’s PM facing pressure from all sides as some say ceasefire agreement does not go far enoughIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has managed to avert a wider rebellion over the Gaza deal with Hamas among his far-right coalition partners even as Itamar Ben-Gvir, the firebrand national security minister, called it immoral.
Three ministers, all from Ben-Gvir’s far-right Jewish Power party, oppose the deal but members of the equally hardline Religious Zionist party were persuaded to support it after heated exchanges in an Israeli cabinet meeting late on Tuesday night.
The agreement reached with Hamas will mean 50 women and children who are being held as hostages  in Gaza will be released in an exchange for a four-day ceasefire and the release of 150 Palestinian prisoners in Israel, with the possibility of more releases from each side for each further day there is no fighting.
The deal was made after weeks in which Netanyahu had been vocal in his opposition to any pause in Israel’s military offensive against Hamas in Gaza, but there has also been mounting political pressure on the prime minister, who has seen his support among voters collapse since the 7 October massacre by Hamas.
Amid warning signs of political difficulties for Netanyhu, who depends on support from far-right parties to remain in power, Ben-Gvir heavily criticised the deal on Wednesday. “We don’t have the right to agree to separating them and only some of them returning,” he said. “And we definitely cannot accept an outline that sees the release of female and underage terrorists when we don’t get back everyone”, adding that the ceasefire benefited Hamas.
Leaks from the cabinet meeting suggested that Ben-Gvir had also said that the decision to back the deal threatened “generational damage that will come back to hurt us badly”.
The support from Bezalel Smotrich, the finance minister, and his Religious Zionist party, however, represented a victory for Netanyahu and his senior allies.
Support for the deal appears to have been clinched with the decision by Yoav Gallant, the defence minister, and by senior officials in the Israel Defense Forces and Shin Bet domestic intelligence agency to back it, even if it meant slowing the pace of the offensive.
“The Religious Zionist party’s ministers were convinced that this is an achievement that matches and advances the aims of the war and won’t harm them,” the party said in a statement after the vote. “It’s a deal with low prices which is a result of the pressure placed on [Hamas leader Yahya] Sinwar, a deal that will release many women and children, and a move that is limited in time and includes clear mechanisms that will prevent erosion. Immediately afterward, the war will continue until Hamas is destroyed.”
Talks around the truce in exchange for the release of hostages have seen Netayahu and his cabinet attempt to balance two competing concerns.
On one hand, support for an arrangement to release those held captive by Hamas and other armed Palestinian factions in Gaza enjoys widespread public support, much of which has been galvanised by the campaign waged by the families of the hostages.
On the other hand, however, has been the concern that an agreement for a substantial ceasefire could mark the beginning of the end of Israel’s war against Hamas, a concern dismissed by Netanyahu as “nonsense”.
Justifying his support for a deal he had previously rejected, Netanyahu said: “Let me make clear: we are at war, and we will continue the war until we achieve all our objectives – eradicating Hamas, bringing back all our hostages and MIAs, and guaranteeing that there will be no figure in Gaza that threatens Israel.”
Isaac Herzog, Israel’s president, however, acknowledged that the deal – while moral – would inspire “understandable, painful and difficult misgivings”.
“It is a moral and ethical duty that correctly expresses the Jewish and Israeli value of redeeming captives, and I hope that it will be a significant first step for bringing all the captives home,” he said.
Reactions among leading Israeli columnists on Wednesday reflected the continuing political problems that Netanyahu is facing even as he tries to sell the deal, with Nahum Barnea, a journalist for the Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper, suggesting that “Israel has no choice but to pay the price” while linking the agreement with the failures of 7 October.
“The alternative to forsaking the hostages a second time, after they were first forsaken on October, would have been far worse and far more dangerous. Beyond the price it could end up costing in blood and lives, it would have left an indelible stain on the Israeli government and the IDF.”
Others were more damning still. Also writing in Yedioth, Yossi Yehoshua warned that Israel risked missing “an historic opportunity to fundamentally change the Gaza problem, and will not only pay for that in soldiers’ lives but by missing out on a better deal”, adding “we are jeopardising our most important war in recent decades. One man has to own all of this: Binyamin Netanyahu.”
On Kan Radio, Gadi Shamni, a former senior military officer, said: “I’m not sure that Netanyahu wants to win this war. This floundering might work for him.
“Netanyahu already realises that he is going to be remembered in infamy as the man who with his own two hands moulded this crisis. The prime minister delayed the IDF [ground] manoeuvre for weeks – he didn’t believe in the IDF’s capabilities, and he chose to waste his time.
“What Netanyahu wants, first of all, first and foremost, is to minimise the damage to himself,” he said.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Jill Stein formally launches 2024 White House bid as Green party candidate
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 1:47 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 800 words
Byline: Robert Tait
Highlight: Stein is latest in a series of mostly leftist figures to announce candidacies with the potential to erode Biden’s core support
Body


A new front opened in the growing threats to Joe Biden’s presidency on Tuesday when the left-wing environmentalist Jill Stein formally launched her third presidential bid in an online conversation with two fellow progressive activists.
Stein, 73, who is bidding to become the US Green party’s nominee, is the latest in a series of mostly leftist figures to announce candidacies with the potential to erode Biden’s core support in an expected re-match against Donald Trump in next year’s poll.
Having previously announced her candidacy with a video posted on X, formerly Twitter, she gave added substance to her campaign in a live Zoom conversation with Chris Smalls, a US trade union organiser for Amazon workers, and Miko Peled, an Israeli-born pro-Palestinian activist.
“This is all about our community rising up for our higher values,” Stein said. “This is a totally unprecedented political moment.”
The choice of protagonists appeared designed to signal key themes in Stein’s candidacy – workers’ rights, high living costs, and US support for Israel, all issues where Biden is showing vulnerability among his voter base.
“On all these issues, we’re in the target hairs,” Stein said. “We need to start building an America that works for all of us and that includes a living working wage … a Green New Deal … an economic bill of rights. We can end endless wars which don’t solve anything.”
Stein’s entry into the race has special resonance because of her supposedly decisive role in tipping battleground states to Trump in his 2016 presidential election victory over Hillary Clinton.
While winning just 1.4m votes nationwide, Stein won more votes in Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan than Trump’s narrow victory margins, prompting many analysts to conclude that her presence on the ballot was decisive in drawing progressive voters away from Clinton.
Stein also stood as the Green’s candidate in the 2012 election, when she won just over 400,000 votes nationally and was not thought to have played a decisive role in President Barack Obama’s victory over the Republican, Mitt Romney.
Her attempt to earn the Green’s nomination in 2024 follows the decision last month by the party’s original likely nominee, Cornel West, to leave the party and run as an independent.
Both figures join a growing field of purported third party or independent candidates amid growing signs of voter dissatisfaction at the prospect of a repeat of the 2020 presidential race between Biden and Trump.
With the exception of Robert F Kennedy Jr – son of the late attorney general, whose anti-vaccine stance is thought to be attractive to voters on the right – most non-mainstream candidates are thought to pose a greater threat to Biden than Trump, who is far ahead of other candidates to win the Republican nomination.
Biden, who turned 81 this week, faces growing concerns over his age – even though he is just four years older than Trump – and rumbling economic discontent. A recent poll showed Biden trailing his predecessor in five out of six battleground states that he won in 2020.
The president’s path to re-election could become more complicated still if Joe Manchin, a Democratic senator for West Virginia, decides to run as an independent centrist candidate after announcing last week that he would not seek re-election to the Senate.
Manchin has fueled speculation about a presidential run after announcing plans to travel the country to explore the possibility of “creating a movement to mobilise the middle”.
Biden also faces a primary challenge from within his own party in the shape of the Democratic congressman Dean Phillips of Minnesota, who has announced that he will run against the president.
Stein, who is Jewish, has attacked Biden’s unstinting support for Israel in its response to the 7 October attacks by Hamas that killed more than 1,400 people. She has called for a ceasefire to the Israeli military offensive in Gaza, a stance that could potentially gain her support in Michigan, a battleground state containing many ethnic Arab voters who have become disenchanted with Biden’s pro-Israel posture.
In an interview with Newsweek, she warned that Biden’s support for Israel risked nuclear war. She also called Israel an “apartheid state” and said it was committing “genocide” in Gaza, where more than 13,000 Palestinians have been killed since the country launched its military assault in retaliation for Hamas’s attack.
In her campaign video, launched on 9 November, Stein, a medical doctor, called both the Democratic and Republican parties “a threat to our democracy”.
“People are tired of being thrown under the bus by wealthy elites and their bought politicians,” she said. “The political system is broken. We need a party that serves the people. I’m running for president to offer that choice for the people.”

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




First Thing: Israel and Hamas agree to four-day ceasefire and release of 50 hostages
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 10:58 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:2
Length: 1714 words
Byline: Nicola Slawson
Highlight: Israel approves deal in which 50 Israeli women and children will be released in exchange for 150 jailed Palestinians and a lull in fighting. Plus, thousands sign up to anti-loneliness club in LADon’t already get First Thing in your inbox? Sign up here
Body


Good morning.
Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children held hostage in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire, both sides announced this morning. 
The deal was confirmed by a senior US official, who told reporters that the freed hostages would include three Americans, one of them a three-year-old girl. The official said the first hostage release is expected on Thursday morning, and the total number of hostages freed could rise.
The US president, Joe Biden, welcomed the deal and thanked Egypt and Qatar for their “critical leadership and partnership” in reaching the deal. He added: “And I appreciate the commitment that Prime Minister [Benjamin] Netanyahu and his government have made in supporting an extended pause to ensure this deal can be fully carried out and to ensure the provision of additional humanitarian assistance to alleviate the suffering of innocent Palestinian families in Gaza … It is important that all aspects of this deal be fully implemented.”
                                                                                        What has Israel said about the deal? A statement from the Israeli prime minister’s office said the “lull” in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. It did not say when the ceasefire would start, though in his address to his cabinet, Netanyahu said the first hostages should be free within 48 hours of the agreement.                                                                                Sam Altman to return as CEO of OpenAI                                      
Sam Altman is to return as chief executive of OpenAI  after the ChatGPT developer said it had “reached an agreement in principle” for his reinstatement.
The San Francisco-based company made the announcement after days of corporate drama after Altman’s surprise sacking on Friday. Nearly all of OpenAI’s 750-strong workforce had threatened to quit unless the board overseeing the business brought back Altman and then quit immediately afterwards.
As part of the agreement reached overnight, the deal includes a new-look board led by Bret Taylor, the former co-CEO of the software firm Salesforce. It will include Larry Summers, the former US treasury secretary, and Adam D’Angelo, the tech entrepreneur and current board member who played a role in Altman’s firing.
                                                                                        What did Altman say? He posted soon after: “I love OpenAI, and everything I’ve done over the past few days has been in service of keeping this team and its mission together.” He added: “I’m looking forward to returning to OpenAI.”                                                                                Jill Stein formally launches 2024 White House bid as Green party candidate                                      
A new front opened in the growing threats to Joe Biden’s presidency yesterday when the leftwing environmentalist Jill Stein formally launched her third presidential bid  in an online conversation with two fellow progressive activists.
Stein, 73, who is bidding to become the US Green party’s nominee, is the latest in a series of mostly leftist figures to announce candidacies with the potential to erode Biden’s core support in an expected rematch against Donald Trump in next year’s poll.
Having previously announced her candidacy with a video posted on X, formerly Twitter, she gave added substance to her campaign in a live Zoom conversation with Chris Smalls, a US trade union organiser for Amazon workers, and Miko Peled, an Israeli-born pro-Palestinian activist.
                                                                                        Why does her entry into the race have special resonance? She had a supposedly decisive role in tipping battleground states to Trump in his 2016 presidential election victory over Hillary Clinton. While winning just 1.4m votes nationwide, Stein won more votes in Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan than Trump’s narrow victory margins, prompting many analysts to conclude that her presence on the ballot was decisive in drawing progressive voters away from Clinton.                                                                                In other news …                                                                                                           A landslide that ripped down a sopping, heavily forested mountainside in south-east Alaska killed three people , injured a woman and left three others missing as it smashed into three homes in a remote fishing community, authorities said yesterday.                                                                                          Pakistan’s decision to impose hundreds of dollars in exit fees for every Afghan refugee who fled the persecution by the Taliban has been condemned as “shocking and frustrating”  by western diplomats and the UN.  Refugees waiting to leave Pakistan for western countries under resettlement schemes are to be charged $830 each.                                                                                          Dutch voters are voting in a knife-edge general election  that will usher in the                         Netherlands’                          first new prime minister in 13 years, with four parties from left to far right vying to become the largest in parliament.  The election could set the country on a different course after Mark Rutte’s four consecutive governments.                                                                                          A Roman Catholic priest in Alabama who was investigated by law enforcement after fleeing to Europe with a recent high school graduate he met through his ministry legally married after he returned to the US with her, a document provided to the Guardian showed.                                                                                 Stat of the day: Crypto giant Binance admits to money laundering and agrees to pay $4.3bn                                      
Changpeng Zhao, the founder of Binance, the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchange, agreed to resign from the company and plead guilty to money laundering  yesterday. As part of a guilty plea, Zhao agreed to pay a $50m fine and would be barred from any involvement in the business. Binance also agreed to plead guilty, accept the appointment of a monitor and pay a criminal fine of nearly $1.81bn as well as a $2.51bn order of forfeiture to settle three criminal charges. The US justice department had charged the company with conducting an unlicensed money transmitting business, a conspiracy charge and violating the International Emergency Economic Powers Act.
                                        Don’t miss this: Anti-loneliness club offers friendship for $200 a month – and thousands have signed up                                      
Americans are facing a friend shortage. This year, the surgeon general warned of an epidemic: half of us are experiencing “measurable levels” of loneliness at any moment, whether it’s related to losing a loved one, moving to a new city, financial or health issues, or the isolation that comes with remote work.
As with virtually every modern problem, a California startup says it has a solution.  Groundfloor, which began in the Bay Area and will soon open a location in Los Angeles, is a social club with a focus on friendship. What sets it apart from other members-only clubs is that it is marketed to those seeking community rather than exclusivity.
                                        Climate check: ‘The river took it all’ – Somalis wait for waters to recede as floods kill dozens                                      
Just a few weeks ago, Somalis were praying for the heavens to open after a prolonged drought, following an unprecedented six failed rainy seasons, forced many to abandon their cherished nomadic way of life for ever. Now, they are praying for the rain to stop. Floods, described by the UN as a “once-in-a-century event”, have killed at least 50 people and forced almost half a million to flee their homes.  The combination of two climate phenomena – El Niño and the Indian Ocean dipole – with unusually heavy seasonal rains have led to towns, villages, farms and pastures all but disappearing underwater.
                                        Last Thing: Deep space astronauts may be prone to erectile dysfunction, study finds                                      
As if homesickness, wasting muscles, thinner bones, an elevated cancer risk, the inescapable company of overachievers and the prospect of death in the endless vacuum of space were not enough to contend with, male astronauts may return from deep space prone to erectile dysfunction , scientists say. In what is claimed to be the first study to assess the impact of galactic radiation and weightlessness on male sexual health, Nasa-funded researchers found that galactic cosmic rays, and to a lesser extent microgravity, can impair the function of erectile tissues, with effects lasting potentially for decades.
                                        Help us raise $1.5m to fund independent journalism in 2024                                      
As we head into 2024, the Guardian’s journalists are already hard at work preparing for one of the most consequential news cycles of our lifetimes. We need your support to raise $1.5m to fund our reporting into areas such as: the 2024 election and the potential for another Trump presidency; continued war in the Middle East; the sweeping implications of artificial intelligence; the climate crisis; and investigations into high-stakes abuses of power. If you value our reporting, please make a year-end gift today.  We’re depending on you.
                                        Sign up                                      
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. 
                                        Get in touch                                      
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Despite the truce, people in Gaza will keep dying – this horrifying death toll must never be forgotten
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 9:02 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:3
Length: 1047 words
Byline: Owen Jones
Highlight: Comparison with other conflicts paints a harrowing picture of children being killed in unforgivable numbers
Body


Even if the truce  between Benjamin Netanyahu’s government and Hamas results in the promised four-day pause in hostilities – or longer – the horror enveloping Gaza in terms of lives lost is worse than many people think. Among those who oppose Israel’s onslaught, there are still those who do not truly grasp it. It’s understandable that Israeli authorities are seeking to sow doubt about the size of the death toll, because the numbers expose the gravity of the crimes being committed. But we should not be deceived.
Take the argument that the health ministry is Hamas-run and, therefore, its figures can never be trusted. It sounds like a reasonable enough claim on the surface, until you realise that in previous conflicts the death toll reported by the ministry was largely consistent with the UN’s and even Israel’s counts. Last month, after doubts were raised by President Biden, the ministry even released the names, ages and identification numbers of the victims.
Indeed, the health ministry’s official estimate – currently 13,300 dead after six weeks – could well be an underestimate, as a senior US official has conceded.  The figures do not include the dead buried under rubble who have not been retrieved. According to the independent Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Monitor, which is chaired by US emeritus law professor and former UN special rapporteur on Palestine, Richard Falk, the civilian death toll  as of 20 November is 16,413, with nearly 34,000 injured. This would mean one in every 142 Palestinian civilians killed in a month and a half. 
Given that this slaughter may not end soon, the current health ministry tally of 13,300 dead, when placed in the context of Gaza’s population of 2.2 million, tells us something about the sheer scale of what has happened. Comparisons with other conflicts are truly eye-opening here. The Bosnian war loomed over my own childhood as a case study of an unspeakable atrocity. About 40,000 civilians died in those killing fields  in the years between 1992 and 1995. That was over three years, not six weeks, and it was in a country whose prewar population was about twice that of Gaza. 
But aren’t many of the deaths in Gaza not civilians, but Hamas militants, you might ask? The evidence suggests not. Research by the Iraq Body Count project, which diligently compiled violent civilian deaths after the 2003 invasion, concluded last month  about Gaza that “few of the victims can have been combatants”. Analysing the ministry of health data, they found only a “modest excess of adult males killed”, which could be explained by their greater exposure to risk in, for instance, rescue efforts. With an estimated 70% of the dead being women and children – and many of the slain men unlikely to have been combatants – their conclusion is difficult to rebut.
We could also make a comparison with the war in Syria, rightly regarded as one of the great moral obscenities of our age. The UN estimates  that nearly 307,000 civilians have met violent ends since 2011. Its prewar population was just over 10 times that of Gaza.  This means that after just six weeks, the death rate of Palestinians is approaching half that of Syrians after a decade of war.
Another comparison is Yemen. This is a tragedy close to my heart: I’ve written multiple columns  about the western-backed Saudi onslaught and visited a Yemeni refugee camp , where children drew pictures of dead relatives slain by bombs. An estimated 15,000 Yemeni civilians were killed by direct military action between 2015 and 2021, mostly by Saudi-led airstrikes. This is comparable to Gaza, except Yemen’s average population in these war years was 14 times greater than Gaza’s, and this death toll was amassed over six years, not six weeks.
It might be countered that Yemen’s death toll is actually closer to 377,000, because of deaths from indirect causes, such as a lack of access to food, water and healthcare. But, of course, the same will be true of Gaza under siege and that figure will only become clear after the current bloodshed is over.
A comparison of child deaths across conflicts, macabre as it is, underlines the unique nature of this conflict in Gaza. In the first two years of the Syrian war, children were estimated to represent roughly 10% of deaths , in Iraq since 2003, 8.6% and in Ukraine since the invasion, 6%. In Gaza, they represent an estimated 42% of deaths. 
No comparison is perfect and every tragedy must be understood on its own terms. Yet these numbers give a sense of the unusually brutal scale of what is happening in Gaza. It is not as if the realities on the ground are hidden. Thanks to courageous journalists and media workers – dozens now killed – we have evidence of the civilian toll in the most graphic detail possible. So where is the urgency on behalf of western politicians and many media outlets to put a stop to this? Why doesn’t it rival their justified disgust at the horrors unleashed by Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine? Few cheerleaders of Israel’s invasion have been able to admit that Hamas’s obscene atrocities of 7 October do not justify civilian death on this scale. 
This truce is welcome but the widespread destruction of infrastructure will mean people keep dying long after the bombs stop falling. And with Israel’s stated desire to occupy Gaza “for an indefinite period” , much violence is surely yet to come. We are left with a bleak conclusion. There isn’t even a pretence that Palestinian life matters. An Israeli civilian death toll of more than 1,000 was rightly understood to be intolerable, but there appears no limit to how many Gazans can meet violent ends. This brazen disregard for innocent life has barely been discussed in the west. It has been widely understood beyond in the Arab world and much of the global south, though, and it will not be forgotten.
                                                               Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist                                                                     Do you have an opinion on the issues raised in this article? If you would like to submit a response of up to 300 words by email to be considered for publication in our letters  section, please click here.                                                                                 

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




The principle of human dignity must apply to all people
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 4:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 705 words
Highlight: Adam Tooze, Samuel Moyn, Amia Srinivasan and others respond to a statement issued by German academics on the situation in Israel and Gaza. Report:Israel-Hamas war opens up German debate over meaning of ‘Never again’
Body


We the undersigned are deeply concerned by the statement  “Principles of solidarity” published on the website of the Normative Orders research centre at Goethe-Universität Frankfurt on 13 November 2023, signed by Nicole Deitelhoff, Rainer Forst, Klaus Günther and Jürgen Habermas.
We join the authors in condemning the killing and taking hostage of Israeli civilians by Hamas on 7 October 2023 and we fully agree with the vital need to protect Jewish life in Germany in the face of rising antisemitism. We also agree with the statement’s grounding of these positions in the respect for human dignity for all people as a central part of the “democratic ethos of the Federal Republic of Germany”.
However, we are deeply troubled by the apparent limits of the solidarity expressed by the authors. The statement’s concern for human dignity is not adequately extended to Palestinian civilians in Gaza who are facing death and destruction. Nor is it applied or extended to Muslims in Germany experiencing rising Islamophobia. Solidarity means that the principle of human dignity must apply to all people. This requires us to recognise and address the suffering of all those affected by an armed conflict.
The statement claims that “the standards of judgement slip completely when genocidal intentions are attributed to Israel’s actions”. There is ongoing discussion  among genocide scholars  and legal experts about whether the legal standard for genocide has been met. Human rights groups have filed lawsuits alleging genocide at the international criminal court  and a federal court  in the US. Omer Bartov , professor of Holocaust and genocide studies at Brown University, has recently reminded us: “We know from history that it is crucial to warn of the potential for genocide before it occurs, rather than belatedly condemn it after it has taken place. I think we still have that time.” Showing solidarity and respecting human dignity means that we must heed this warning and not close down the space for debate and reflection about the possibility of genocide. Not all signatories believe that the legal standards for genocide have been met; nevertheless, all agree that this is a matter of legitimate debate.
The statement mentions three “guiding principles” for military action: “principles of proportionality, the prevention of civilian casualties and the waging of a war with the prospect for future peace”. We are concerned that there is no mention of upholding international law, which also prohibits war crimes and crimes against humanity such as collective punishment, persecution, and the destruction of civilian infrastructure including schools, hospitals and places of worship. Being guided by principles of international legal standards, solidarity and human dignity compels us to hold all participants in the conflict to this higher standard.
We cannot allow the atrocities to force us to abandon these principles.
                     Adam Tooze                     Professor of history, Columbia University                                          Samuel Moyn                     Professor of law and history, Yale University                      Amia Srinivasan                     Professor of social and political theory, University of Oxford                      Nancy Fraser                     Professor of political and social science, New School for Social Research                      Alice Crary                     Professor of philosophy, New School for Social Research                      Linda Zerilli                     Charles E Merriam distinguished service professor of political science, University of Chicago                      Chandra Talpade Mohanty                     Distinguished professor, Syracuse University                      Diedrich Diederichsen                     Professor for theory of contemporary art, Academy of Fine Arts, Vienna                      Beate Roessler                     Professor of philosophy, University of Amsterdam                      Quinn Slobodian                     Professor of history, Wellesley College                      Cécile Malaspina                     Director of programme, Collège international de philosophie, France                   

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Afternoon Update: Israel and Hamas agree to four-day ceasefire; ABC settles Bruce Lehrmann defamation case; and US Catholic priest marries teen
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 5:39 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1086 words
Byline: Antoun Issa
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Afternoon Update here, and start your day with our Morning Mail newsletter.
Body


Good afternoon. Israel and Hamas have agreed to a four-day ceasefire, which will include the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for 150 Palestinian women and children to be freed from Israeli jails.
But the war will go on , the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, vowed, “until we achieve all our goals”. A statement from Netanyahu’s office also said the “lull” in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. Read this analysis  on how the pressure on Netanyahu has resulted in a shift in position.
In Australia, civil liberties groups have accused  New South Wales police of heavy-handed tactics against pro-Palestine protesters at a rally at Port Botany last night – a charge the Labor premier, Chris Minns, rejected.
                   Top news                                                                   ABC settles defamation case with Bruce Lehrmann | But the case against Network Ten proceeded today, with the federal court hearing  that Ten’s broadcast of an interview between Lisa Wilkinson and Brittany Higgins on The Project “utterly destroyed” Lehrmann’s life. It is day one of the trial, with Lehrmann seeking significant compensation, his barrister told the court.                                                                     Remains of Port Phillip Bay plane crash victims found | Victoria police said they discovered what they believed  were the remains of the 30-year-old camera operator, Surrey Hills man James Rose, and the 56-year-old pilot, Stephen Gale, of Brunswick. Their aircraft was one of two Viper S-211 Marchetti planes conducting a formation flight for a Jetworks Aviation promotional video about 12km west of Mount Martha on Sunday, before colliding midair.                                                                                                           Police appeal over suspected arson attack on Friendlyjordies’s home | Detectives are hoping CCTV footage could spark a breakthrough  in their investigation into a suspected arson attack on the home of YouTube personality Jordan Shanks-Markovina. The footage released today shows two cars investigators believe could be linked to the 23 November 2022 blaze.                                                                     Legal aid at risk of turning people away | Almost $500m in extra funding is needed each year  to meet demand for legal assistance in Australia, a new report commissioned by National Legal Aid has found. It found commonwealth funding for legal aid had fallen 3% per capita over the past decade but demand for employment, housing, goods and related services had increased.                                                                                                           Drunk stowaway travels 400km up east coast in truck undercarriage | After a big night out, a NSW man got more  than he bargained for when he hitched a ride underneath a semi-trailer and ended up on the Gold Coast in Queensland. “Just stupidity, to be honest with you,” he described it.                                                                     China closing hundreds of mosques in northern regions | Researchers at Human Rights Watch said the Chinese government  was significantly reducing the number of mosques in the Ningxia autonomous region and Gansu province – homes to the highest Muslim populations in China after Xinjiang – as part of broader efforts to “sinicise” China’s religious minorities.                                                                                                           US Catholic priest marries teen | Alexander Crow, a 30-year-old Roman Catholic priest in Alabama has married an 18-year-old girl  who he met through his ministry. Crow was investigated by US law enforcement after he fled with the recent high school graduate to Italy, and married her upon returning to the US. In late July, the Catholic archdiocese of Mobile removed his clerical duties.                                                                     Jill Stein launches White House bid as Green party candidate | Stein is the latest in a series  of mostly leftist figures to announce candidacies with the potential to erode Joe Biden’s core support.                                                           In pictures                   
                     2023 ocean photographer of the year                   
The winners and finalists of this year’s contest celebrate the blue planet but they also draw attention to the many environmental challenges to marine life and ecosystems. Click here to view the photo gallery.
                   What they said …                   
***
“A World Cup, you only get one chance every four years and especially playing somewhere like India, it’s hard. To be pitted up against the rest of the world and come away with a medal, it doesn’t get any better than that.” – Pat Cummins, Australian cricket captain
                   In numbers                   
And 54% said fuel efficiency standards would save them money, a national survey  commissioned by the Climate Council found. The Labor government has yet to release details  of a fuel efficiency standard, which advocates say is slowing the uptake of electric vehicles.
                   Before bed read                   
At 43, Claire Mulcahy realised she could no longer afford to live alone. Living with her mother was not the life trajectory she expected but it has come with its own opportunities.
“What we don’t foresee is our mother anxiously inquiring at our bedroom door at 6am, wondering why we are not up yet: ‘Aren’t you going to be late for work?’ In that moment we are 15 years old again.” Read the story.
                   Reader callout – how are you saving money this Christmas?                   
And so this is Christmas, and what have you done … to pay for it? In the spirit of sharing, we want to hear your approaches to giving gifts, decorating your home and entertaining family and friends, with limited budgets in mind.
Tell us here.
                   Daily word game                   
Today’s starter word is: WARM.  You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. 
                   Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know. Sign up for our Morning Mail newsletter here.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Former state department official loses job after Islamophobic tirade at New York street vendor
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 5:12 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 556 words
Byline: Edward Helmore
Highlight: Halal food worker might soon be able to take legal action against the explicit and racist abuse after the attacker’s firm offered free representation
Body


A New York political lobbying firm has offered to represent a halal street food vendor who was recently subjected to a sustained racist attack by one of its own consultants, a former state department official, in the latest encounter reflecting tension in the city over the Israel-Hamas conflict.
The Manhattan-based Gotham Government Relations firm said on Tuesday that it would cut all ties with Stuart Seldowitz, who worked in the US Department of State’s Office of Israel and Palestinian Affairs from 1999 to 2003 and later at the national security council during the Obama administration, after he was filmed harassing an Upper East Side street vendor.
In one widely shared video , Seldowitz is heard to ask the unidentified vendor: “Did you rape your daughter like Muhammad did?” In another, he states  : “If we killed 4,000 Palestinian kids, you know what? It wasn’t enough. It wasn’t enough.”
When the vendor says he doesn’t speak English, Seldowitz laughs and says, “That’s why you’re selling food in a food cart, because you’re ignorant,” before suggesting that the vendor will be deported to Egypt and tortured by intelligence agents.
“The mukhabarat in Egypt will get your parents,” Seldowitz said in the video. “Does your father like his fingernails? They will take them out one by one.”
The vendor is heard asking Seldowitz to “please go” and saying that he would call the police.
An NYPD spokesperson told the outlet that they are aware of the videos and monitoring the situation but that no reports had been filed. The woman who posted the videos , who is believed to be a social activist and Columbia University graduate, said Seldowitz had been harassing the vendor for weeks.
Seldowitz was identified by  the City & State publication, and later said that he’d had “an argument with a food vendor”, adding: “It is quite possible that it’s me. I mean, I’ve not seen the video, but I believe it’s probably me.”
The lobbying firm where Seldowitz was a consultant said it has cut ties with him, stating: “The video of his actions is vile racist, and beneath the dignity of the standards we practice at our firm.”
“I’m absolutely outraged by this video,” the founder and president of Gotham Government Relations, David Schwartz, told the outlet, adding: “I’ll represent the food vendor pro bono if he wants to bring a lawsuit.”
Another firm connected to Seldowitz, according to his LinkedIn profile, Northwestern Mutual, denied  that the man caught in the videos was an employee or affiliated with it.
Seldowitz told City & State he was “blindsided” by being fired by the lobbying firm and said he had not worked with Gotham “for a very long time”.
He said he often passed the vendor and claimed he wanted to engage him in a discussion about current events. “I regret the whole thing happened and I’m sorry,” he said. “But you know, in the heat of the moment, I said things that probably I shouldn’t have said.”
The vendor told the Daily Mail, giving his name as Mohammad and his age as 24, that he did nothing to provoke Seldowitz, who he said started asking him two weeks ago where he was from and harassing him about the war between Hamas and Israel. His boss, Islam Mustafa, translating for him, said Mohammad felt “hurt”.
“He’s scared. He is just a worker. Now he’s fighting someone with connections and a lot of power,” Mustafa said.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Corrections and clarifications
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 9:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS; Version:1
Length: 251 words
Byline: Corrections and clarifications column editor
Highlight: Bathing area pollution study
Body


 An article said: “The majority of popular inland bathing spots in the UK have been found to be unsafe for swimming.?” While that finding appeared in the Surfers Against Sewage annual water quality report for the UK, the survey on which it was based was carried out in, and applies only to, England ( Most inland bathing spots have unsafe pollution levels – report , 21 November, p15).
 Other recently amended articles include:
Four bodies recovered in search for missing teenagers in north Wales
Patient privacy fears as US spy tech firm Palantir wins £330m NHS contract
Pro-Palestinian activists will claim damage to company in UK was lawfully justified
Palestinian poet Mosab Abu Toha detained by Israelis in Gaza, family says
‘I feel called to do this’: US providers sending abortion medication by mail
One in 10 Australian men report having sexual interactions with under-18s, study finds
Banksy reveals his first name in resurfaced interview clip
Pieter Omtzigt: the Netherlands outsider whose politics is firmly in the centre
Six of Northern Ireland’s ancient Dark Hedges trees to be cut down
Tails I win: coin toss sends North Carolina candidate into mayor’s office
                     Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to:                      guardian.readers@theguardian.com                      .                                          You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.                   

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Families of hostages in Gaza wait to see if relatives among those freed
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 3:48 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:6
Length: 917 words
Byline: Emine Sinmaz and Bethan McKernan in Jerusalem
Highlight: Relatives of some of the 240 hostages say it is like ‘Russian roulette’ waiting to hear who will come outIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


The families of hostages held in Gaza have said they are living in a “nightmare” as they endure an agonising wait to see if their loves ones are among those freed.
Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release  of 50 women and children in return for 150 Palestinian women and children being freed from Israeli jails during a four-day ceasefire.
The relatives of some of the 240 hostages in Gaza have said they are grappling with feeling both optimistic about the deal, and fearful their loved ones may be left behind. The families said they were in the dark about who would be released and when.
Keren Schem said she feared the deal might collapse but she was praying for the release of her daughter, Mia Schem, 21, who was abducted from the Supernova music festival. “It’s like Russian roulette. We don’t know who’s going to come out,” Keren Schem, 51, said. “They’re talking about children and their mothers so I don’t think that Mia will come out today or tomorrow or even the day after. But I’m praying that she will because nobody really knows.”
Mia, a French-Israeli tattoo artist, appeared to be injured in a hostage video released by Hamas on 17 October. Her mother said her daughter needed to be released urgently so she could receive medical treatment. “I don’t know where she is, if she’s alive, and in what condition she’s in, if she eats, if she sleeps, if they’re hurting her. It’s so terrible,” she said.
Eylon Keshet said he was afraid that his cousin, Yarden Bibas, 34, would be split from his wife, Shiri, 32 and their two boys, Ariel, four, and 10-month-old Kfir, who is thought to be the youngest hostage.
“I’m afraid that this is what it means, but, unfortunately, I’m not optimistic from the very beginning that Yarden was held together with them because he was kidnapped separately from them and I don’t think Hamas cares much to reunite families,” Keshet said.
Footage of Shiri clutching her two red-haired children as she was abducted was posted online. Yarden appeared in a separate video with an apparent head injury. “We still don’t know whether Shiri, Ariel and Kfir will be a part of this deal. And we still don’t have information about their wellbeing, so we can’t feel relieved until they’ve actually made it back here,” Keshet said.
Itay Raviv, three generations of whose family are being held hostage, said he was wrestling with “a mixture of feelings”. His aunt and uncle, Ruti and Avraham Munder, both 78, were abducted from the Nir Oz kibbutz along with their daughter Keren and her son Ohad, who turned nine in captivity. Keren’s brother, Roee Munder, 50, was among the 1,200 people killed after Hamas stormed southern Israel on 7 October.
“We’re in an ongoing nightmare,” Raviv said. “We feel both excited, but still very nervous and scared because nothing is promised and we don’t know who is going to be released, if any, because we cannot trust Hamas. We must remember that, according to what is being reported, it’s only going to be women and children, and I have some other family members, my uncle and aunt, in Hamas’s hands as well.”
He said the family had not been told if any of the four captives would be released and that it was “all assumptions at the moment”.
Raviv, 27, the CEO of a non-profit organisation, said the family was preparing for a memorial service for Roee on Wednesday afternoon, as they waited for news about the hostages. “We’re going there without his parents, without his sister, without his nephew, and this is the same way the funeral was, which is just another sad thing that happens in our reality,” he said. Sharone Lifschitz, whose 85-year-old mother, Yocheved Lifshitz, was released by Hamas after 16 days in captivity, said it was “devastating” that her father, Oded, 83, who is still being held hostage, would unlikely to be among those released in the first stages of the deal.
The first hostage release is now not expected until Friday at the earliest, and the total number of those freed could rise. The Israeli government said the ceasefire would be extended by a day for every 10 additional hostages released, but it is unclear who that would include.
“We are very anxious in terms of going forward. When will it be our turn? It’s just really hard to survive emotionally. It’s the most horrific extension of a position that was impossible to begin with,” Lifschitz said. “We are in the hands of a terrorist organisation that is doing everything to maximise our pain and the suffering.”
Lifschitz, a London-based artist and academic, said she believed her father, a veteran journalist and peace activist from Nir Oz, would think it was right that children were being released before him. “If there is a queue for the way out, he and quite a few other members will be fighting to be at the end of the queue and give their place ahead. That’s what I feel,” she said.
She said her mother was also in agreement. “She thinks very similar to me, that we have to return the children, that there is nothing else to it.”
The British niece of Ditza Heiman, 84, a retired social worker and widow taken from Nir Oz, said they were “desperate for good news”. The last time anyone heard from the mother of four was at about 4pm on 7 October when a Hamas fighter answered her phone.
Her niece, who did not want to be named, said: “It’s agonising. She’s 84 so she could be eligible for this deal but we don’t know, none of the loved ones do. Every family’s suffering that can be reduced is a good thing, but we don’t know whether it will be us.”

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Rights groups condemn ‘police repression’ at ‘peaceful’ pro-Palestine rally in Sydney
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 2:33 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 881 words
Byline: Catie McLeod and Tamsin Rose
Highlight: Chris Minns says NSW police acted ‘responsibly’ despite condemnation from protesters and civil rights groupsFollow our Australia news live blog for latest updatesGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


Protesters who attended a pro-Palestine rally in Sydney on Tuesday night that was forcibly broken up by police have disputed the New South Wales premier Chris Minns’ claim that the response to the event was reasonable.
NSW police arrested and charged 23 people who attended the protest at Port Botany directed at the unloading of a ship owned by Israeli company ZIM, which has supported the Israeli government in its fight with Hamas in Gaza.
The organisers, Palestine Justice Movement Sydney and Unionists for Palestine, along with civil rights groups, condemned the police for their response after riot squad and mounted officers forcibly tried to disperse the crowds, which included children.
Guardian Australia has spoken with a number of protesters who claimed the police were aggressive and appeared unconcerned about the potential for a crowd crush as a result of their actions.
An Australian Services Union member and protester, Hannah Thomas, claimed the protest was a “peaceful sit-in” until police arrived and began “ripping up” attenders from the road in a “ruthless and rough” manner.
“They started pulling people up by their clothes and limbs,” she said.
“Cops were ripping up protesters. Mounted police started running their horses into the crowd.”
Sign up for Guardian Australia’s free morning and afternoon email newsletters for your daily news roundup
Thomas said protesters tried to get out of the way but the exit was a narrow pathway and there was potential for a “terrifying” crowd crush.
“It felt like police were … recklessly indifferent to it,” Thomas claimed.
“I found what has been really shocking is that despite how much footage there is, that the premier has backed the police.”
Freelance photographer and journalist Ran Fields witnessed and filmed the police response and said in no instance did he see any of the protesters “act first”.
“They were not aggressive in the crowd. They were not provoking the officers in the crowds,” he said.
Fields, who showed the videos he took to Guardian Australia to corroborate his claims, said he did not think the way in which the officers were engaging with the protesters was proportionate.
“A person was being held down but also given an order to stand up, but their legs were being contorted by another officer,” he claimed.
“And the police officer came and smacked their phone out of their hands, grabbed them by the arm and slung … their body into the ground.”
NSW police declined to comment further when contacted by Guardian Australia.
                   Rights groups voice ‘deep concern’                   
The NSW Council for Civil Liberties, the Human Rights Law Centre and the Australian Democracy Network released a joint statement saying they were “deeply concerned” about the “police repression of a peaceful protest”.
They also accused police of causing a “crowd crush” and alleged that officers “physically pushed” several independent legal observers who were there.
The premier defended the police and said he “completely rejected” any suggestion their response was disproportionate.
Addressing the media on Wednesday, Minns said the protesters had occupied a street without organisers lodging a form 1 declaration, which they were required to do in order for the event to be “authorised”.
“It was only after ample time was given to the protesters to leave the roadway and allow commerce to transact in that port were arrests effected,” he said.
“Now, I think any reasonable person would say, once you stack up that chronology, the police acted completely responsibly.”
The police commissioner, Karen Webb, said police were “very patient” in dealing with the protesters and only took “proportionate” action when they failed to comply with orders to move on.
Webb claimed a “large number” of the people present were “professional protesters” who were “currently protesting about the Gaza conflict but next week they’ll probably protest about something else”.
The protesters who were arrested were charged with failing to comply with a move on direction and damaging or disrupting a major facility. One 29-year-old woman was also charged with assaulting a police officer without causing actual bodily harm.
Police said all of the people arrested were released on bail except for two, a 24-year-old man and another 29-year-old woman, who were remanded in custody to appear at the Downing Centre local court on Wednesday.
The NSW opposition leader, Mark Speakman, threw his support behind the police. He said it was “disturbing” that there had been a confrontation at a public place and people’s right to import goods had been disrupted.
Speakman called on Minns and the police minister, Yasmin Catley, to condemn the Sydney branch of the Maritime Union of Australia for their involvement in the protest.
Minns attempted to distance his government from the union on Wednesday morning. The MUA, which is affiliated with the NSW Labor party, declined to comment.
NSW Greens MPs Sue Higginson and Jenny Leong accused police of responding to the protesters with “unprovoked and unbridled aggression”.
“Violence against peaceful protesters can never be justified – and must never be tolerated,” they said.
One of the protest’s organisers, Ahmed Abadla, condemned the police response, saying the protest was a “peaceful, nonviolent boycott”.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Man found dead after statewide search – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 7:30 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:25
Length: 9890 words
Byline: Daisy Dumas and Mostafa Rachwani (earlier)
Highlight: This blog is now closed.Lies, whisky and an after-hours visit: Bruce Lehrmann admits he didn’t tell police truth during defamation trial cross examinationGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


block-time published-time 7.23am GMT 
 What we learned; Thursday 23 November  
It’s the end of another busy day here. Here’s our Thursday wrap:
Ten homes have been lost to bushfires in Wanneroo  in Perth’s north, where the out-of-control blaze continues to burn in highly volatile conditions.A group of people was detected  at an isolated section of the northern WA coast on Wednesday after arriving by boat, prompting Coalition accusations about resumption of dangerous boat journeys.Anthony Albanese said the Australian government welcomes steps towards a ceasefire in Gaza , but reiterated it “can’t be one-sided”. Industry minister Ed Husic said it is “extraordinarily crass”  for the opposition to use the issuing of 860 temporary visas to Palestinians as a moment to try to score political points after the Coalition questioned the security process behind the visas.
Bruce Lehrmann took the stand for the second day  in the high-profile defamation case this morning as his legal team takes him through the events of the night Brittany Higgins claims she was sexually assaulted.Police have found the body of Kevin Jewell , who triggered a statewide manhunt after his wife, Jodie, was shot dead at their South Australia home on Tuesday evening.Bill Shorten’s office was vandalised  in an apparent response to his calls to “dial down the degree of aggro” in Australia over Israel’s invasion of Gaza.And, finally, best of luck tonight to all of Guardian Australia’s Walkley award  nominees.
Thanks for joining us today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.32am GMT
block-time published-time 7.08am GMT 
The 68th annual Walkley awards will soon be handed out in Sydney, with Guardian Australia nominated across feature writing, commentary and analysis, news photography and specialist reporting categories.
Best of luck to political editor Katharine Murphy, Indigenous affairs editor Lorena Allam, social affairs and inequality editor Luke Henriques-Gomes, inequality reporter Stephanie Convery, Queensland correspondent Ben Smee, reporter Christopher Knaus and photographer Dean Sewell. 
Read more about all seven nominees’ standout work:
 Related:  Guardian Australia picks up seven Walkley award nominations
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.20am GMT
block-time published-time 6.50am GMT 
 Queensland to allocate $1.2m for home births trial 
The Queensland government will fund home births for the first time, leaving Tasmania as the only state or territory that does not fund home births. Health minister Shannon Fentiman announced the state will allocate $1.2m for a trial in the Sunshine Coast. It will be provided by Queensland health midwives employed under the midwife group practice model from the Sunshine Coast university hospital. It will only be available for low-risk births, and not twins or triplets. There is also a requirement that the home be close enough to the hospital in case of an emergency and that it be assessed as suitable. “Queensland women have spoken, and we have listened,” Fentiman said. “Queensland women deserve access to high-quality, respectful, and reliable maternity services, and this new service is a significant step towards expanding those options available.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.57am GMT
block-time published-time 6.45am GMT 
Continuing on the case seeking to free Iranian asylum seeker Ned Kelly Emeralds, and  Matthew Albert, Emerald’s counsel, told the federal court hearing that his client had tried to kill himself in detention, vowing “I will not go back to be tortured and killed by a regime I despise”. In one incident in 2015 Emeralds injured his neck, after which he was left mute.
Albert said that after the high court’s NZYQ decision cases of indefinite detention such as his client’s “should never happen again”.
Albert submitted that there was no real prospect of Emerald being deported: first, because he had no travel document after his Iranian passport expired; and secondly, because Iran has a policy of not accepting involuntary return, even of its citizens.
Albert submitted the commonwealth had “done nothing” to look for alternatives to Iran, and there was “not a skerrick” of evidence that his predicament could change in the foreseeable future.
 Greg Johnson, counsel for the commonwealth, said Emeralds was seeking to “ride on the coattails of the recent order” of the high court, for which reasons are yet to be given. The full decision may add “qualification” to the test in cases of “uncooperative” persons, he said.
Unlike NZYQ, in which the impossibility of deportation was agreed by the parties, Johnson said in this case it was in dispute because it was the “applicant’s choice” not to return to Iran, Johnson submitted.
The commonwealth argued that it might be possible to deport Edwards if he met Iranian officials or gave them information to get a new travel document.
Edwards had refused to cooperate with Iranian authorities because his parents and siblings are still in Iran and would be placed at risk if authorities knew he had sought asylum, the court heard. 
block-time published-time 6.42am GMT 
The federal court has reserved judgment in a case seeking to free Iranian asylum seeker Ned Kelly Emeralds, who has spent more than a decade in immigration detention.
Lawyers for Emeralds, including the Human Rights Law Centre, are hoping to use the new high court precedent of NZYQ to release the man, on the basis there is no prospect of deporting him.
On Thursday, justice Geoffrey Kennett labelled it a “particularly disturbing case” given the length of time in detention, but reserved judgment, likely to be delivered next week.
Emeralds arrived in Australia by boat in 2013 and has been detained since that time. According to the Human Rights Law Centre, which represents him, Emeralds was detained while his protection visa application was processed; he has not had a visa cancelled, nor been sentenced for a crime.
In 2016, Emeralds was found to be owed protection by one officer of the Department of Home Affairs. A second officer refused his application for a protection visa in 2018 on the basis he did not have a well-founded fear of return.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.55am GMT
block-time published-time 6.37am GMT 
A group of people was detected at an isolated section of the northern Western Australian coast on Wednesday after arriving by boat, prompting Coalition accusations about resumption of dangerous boat journeys.
The Coalition has claimed the group, of whom 12 are currently in Australian Border Force custody, is the 10th people smuggling venture to reach Australia since the election of the Albanese government. It is not yet clear if they are asylum seekers or fishermen.
The Australian, which first reported the group’s arrival, said police from Kalumburu flew to the Truscott air base near where Wunambal Gaambera Aboriginal people found the new arrivals, who were reportedly “in poor shape”.
Continue reading:
 Related:  Twelve people in border force custody after arriving by boat on isolated section of WA coast
block-time published-time 6.35am GMT 
 Inquest into Wieambilla police deaths set for July 2024 
Hearings for the coroner’s inquest into the murder of two police officers at Wieambilla in Queensland in 2022 could run for as long as a month.
Coroner Terry Ryan is looking into the deaths of Matthew Arnold and Rachel McCrow at a property outside Tara on 12 December 2022. The two officers and good Samaritan neighbour Alan Dare were gunned down by Gareth, Nathaniel and Stacey Train in what police have described as a “religiously motivated terrorist attack”.
Council assisting the coroner Ruth O’Gorman KC today told a pre-inquest conference that a court room at Brisbane magistrates court has been booked from 29 July to 26 August next year for hearings.
“That’s not an indication that consideration has been given to the inquest taking a full month, simply that that time ought to be set aside,” she said.
Last month, coroner Ryan visited the site of the shooting at 251 Wains Road, Wieambilla.
The three Trains were killed in a gun battle with a Queensland police special emergency response team after a six-hour siege.
An earlier pre-inquest conference heard that evidence is expected to contain interviews, walk-throughs, statements from 152 witnesses and forensic examinations.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.51am GMT
block-time published-time 6.34am GMT 
More news is coming out of Western Australia, where bushfires are raging to the north of Perth in the middle of a heatwave.
Authorities say the conditions are changeable and challenging, as firefighters continue to fight the blaze in Wanneroo. It has already destroyed 10 homes and four sheds.
“It’s still a very, very highly volatile fire,” a WA department of fire and emergency services spokesperson said.
The eastern edge appears to be benign, but we are expecting wind changes that are going to reverse the fire back to the south-east and challenge the containment line.
The perimeter of the blaze is 53km long.
    Firefighters are working to contain the fire at Wanneroo in the face of high temperatures and expected wind changes. Photograph: DFES/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.46am GMT
block-time published-time 6.15am GMT 
Transgender Victoria (TGV) is urging policymakers and the public to provide more support in light of the coronial inquest into the five young transgender women who took their own lives between 2020 and 2021.
The peak body stated:
While the Coronial inquiry has thus far been respectful and accommodating of trans perspectives, there is still need for access to culturally appropriate and sensitive services for trans and gender diverse communities in Victoria including:
-gender affirming health care
-suicide prevention and postvention supports
-social and emotional wellbeing supports
-accessible and safe(r) mainstream services.
At the inquest, the relationship between police and trans and gender diverse communities will be a focus.
 Son Vivienne, chief executive of Transgender Victoria said:
This relationship has been historically fraught but in recent years it has become worse.
We are aware that many transgender and gender diverse people are reluctant to dial 000 to access police support, even when their lives are in danger. Transgender Victoria calls for urgent, transparent and accountable improvements to practices and processes in policing to create a sense of safety and support for these communities.
TGV called for sustainable funding for trans-led organisations that specialise in providing support services, education, and advocacy for the community.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.24am GMT
block-time published-time 5.59am GMT 
 Prince Edward is visiting Australia this week and today met with junior New South Wales Rural fire service members.
The Duke of Edinburgh talked with the young volunteers as part of his work as the patron of the Duke of Edinburgh Award.
enltrToday, His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh met with young emergency services volunteers. Junior members Marcus, Emily, Will and Wesley chatted with Prince Edward about their experiences with the RFS and the Duke of Ed Award, of which His Royal Highness is patron. pic.twitter.com/MOYYWBwG29
 — NSW RFS (@NSWRFS) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02am GMT
block-time published-time 5.49am GMT 
The Victorian department of health has warned of a high risk of thunderstorm asthma in parts of the state tomorrow.
Mallee and north central Victoria are affected:
enltrA high risk of epidemic thunderstorm asthma has been forecast for tomorrow in Mallee & North Central Victoria. Stay up to date at @VicEmergency  : https://t.co/nsL2BS9Oji pic.twitter.com/JUWD2fV94T
 — Victorian Department of Health (@VicGovDH) November 23, 2023
block-time published-time 5.38am GMT 
When asked for a response to  Ed Husic’s comments  and whether the Coalition was questioning the visas, Nationals leader David Littleproud told Afternoon Briefing:
Why wouldn’t we? We’d want to make sure due process has taken place not only on the Palestinians and Israelis that have come in but every citizen that comes into this country.
We’ve seen in the last week … this government hasn’t been up to due process when we saw those that were in detention were let out, and today the home affairs minister had no idea that there were four child sex offenders running around our streets without a tracking bracelet on them.
He said that Australia is a “multicultural success story” and that the Coalition wants the nation’s streets to remain safe.
We understand and appreciate the emotion around this but it has to be done respectfully.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.42am GMT
block-time published-time 5.26am GMT 
 Coalition ‘point-scoring’ over temporary visas for Palestinians, Ed Husic says 
Industry minister Ed Husic says it is “extraordinarily crass” for the opposition to use the issuing of 860 temporary visas to Palestinians as a moment to try to score political points after the Coalition questioned the security process behind the visas.
Speaking with ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, he said:
It is crass because a lot of Australian Palestinians … have lost family in Gaza, and want to be able to help remaining family get out of harm’s way. It is both Australians and Palestinians who want to help their loved ones, and if they connect them up with a visa, why would the Coalition have any problem with trying to get people out of harm’s way?
Ultimately, and why would they try to score crass political points, at the point of a hardship, and when people are feeling the weight and feeling anxiety and concern? … They should be asked why they have a problem with trying to help with Australians trying to help family and loved ones get out of harm’s way.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.37am GMT
block-time published-time 5.15am GMT 
 Lehrmann ‘mistaken’ when telling AFP there was no alcohol in his office, court hears  
The federal court has heard Bruce Lehrmann was not telling the truth when he told Australian federal police in a formal interview used in his criminal trial there was no alcohol in his office.
Under cross-examination from Network Ten’s barrister, Dr Matt Collins SC, Lehrmann agreed there were several bottles of whisky and gin in his office when he worked for Senator Linda Reynolds in 2019.
He was shown photographs of his collection of bottles of alcohol and he agreed they were his.
Collins: “You gave an interview didn’t you to the Australian federal police on the 19th of April 2021?”
“And you understood the importance of telling the truth when you are attending that interview?”
Lehrmann: “Yes.”
Collins told the federal court that at Lehrmann’s criminal trial in the ACT supreme court in October 2022 a video of the record of interview was played to the jury. He said Lehrmann also gave instructions to his counsel that he was telling the truth.
This video was played to the federal court and it showed Lehrmann telling the AFP there was no alcohol in his office.
Collins: “In that record of interview you told the Australian federal police that there was no alcohol in Minister Reynolds office as at the 23rd of March 2019?
Lehrmann: “Well, clearly, as we’ve seen … I’ve been mistaken there.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.33am GMT
block-time published-time 5.09am GMT 
 Adelaide gunman found dead after statewide manhunt  
Police have found the body of Kevin Jewell, who triggered a statewide manhunt after his wife, Jodie, was shot dead  at their Modbury North, South Australia, home on Tuesday evening.
The 55-year-old is alleged to have murdered Jodie before fleeing the scene armed with a gun and ammunition.
South Australia police said:
A man’s body, believed to be wanted suspect Kevin Jewell, has been found several km’s [sic] north of Curramulka, on the Yorke Peninsula.
Following information from a member of the public Police attended the intersection of Boundary and Brooke Roads, Curramulka about 11.30am this morning, Thursday 23 November, and located the suspect’s white 2008 Mitsubishi Triton ute and a search found the man deceased about 150 metres away.
Major Crime detectives and Forensic Response Section are making their way to the Curramulka property and will conduct a coronial investigation into the man’s death.
The police said there were no suspicious circumstances and thanked the public for their assistance with the matter.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.20am GMT
block-time published-time 4.52am GMT 
More details are emerging regarding the six-hour siege in northern NSW  :
As we reported earlier, a 45-year-old man was taken into custody before being transferred from Wollongbar to Lismore Base hospital for examination.
No one was injured in the incident and the man is yet to be charged.
NSW police assistant commissioner Peter McKenna said the operation ended with no major issues.
“We had really experienced police in the area,” he said. “We had our tactical police, highly trained police negotiators.”
They are specialists in talking to people and trying to resolve incidents safely and that’s what happened on this occasion.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.55am GMT
block-time published-time 4.36am GMT 
 BoM issues severe thunderstorm warning for parts of NSW  
As bushfires blaze in Western Australia, the scene is different in parts of New South Wales and Queensland, where wet weather is triggering warnings.
The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe thunderstorm warning for parts of NSW’s north west slopes and plains, central west slopes and plains and upper western districts.
The bureau says heavy rain, damaging winds and large hail are possible.
Severe thunderstorms are likely to produce heavy rainfall that may lead to flash flooding over the next several hours in parts of the North West Slopes and Plains, Central West Slopes and Plains and Upper Western districts. Locations which may be affected include Walgett, Coonamble, Lightning Ridge, Brewarrina, Goodooga and Weilmoringle.
enltr????Severe Thunderstorm Warning updated to include the far west including White Cliffs, Wanaaring, Fowlers Gap and Milparinka. Heavy rain, damaging winds and large hail possible. https://t.co/Ss766eSCrL pic.twitter.com/NrsOsQ9qlj
 — Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) November 23, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.41am GMT
block-time published-time 4.27am GMT 
 Santos’ Narrabri gas field project delayed – again 
The fate of Santos’ proposed Narrabri gas field  is one of the longest-running sagas in Australian energy – and it looks like stretching out even further.
Sharp-eyed opponents of the coal-seam gas field in northern NSW have noted the energy giant has quietly pushed back its final investment decision (FID) on the project until 2025. 
A year ago at a similar investor briefing,  Santos had pencilled in the FID down to 2023-24. That date was subject to “securing pipeline approvals and native title determination”.
We’ve asked Santos what the latest reason is for the project’s delay. Environmental activist group Lock the Gate notes the federal government has announced it would reconsider a 14-year-old decision  not to assess the project’s Hunter Gas pipeline under commonwealth environmental laws.
It also follows news that the NSW government has axed a “special activation precinct” in Narrabri  which “would have supported Santos’ project by creating artificial demand for the gas”, Lock the Gate says.
“Santos’ attempts to bury this major delay to Narrabri gas in an investor announcement proves what we’ve been saying all along: the Narrabri gas project does not stack up,” LTG’s coordinator Carmel Flint said.
Santos’ gamble isn’t paying off, it’s well past time to pack it up and go home Santos,” she said.
     Protesters rally against the planned Santos Narrabri gas project in Sydney in September 14. Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.36am GMT
block-time published-time 4.21am GMT 
 Zoe Daniel, independent MP for Goldstein, has commented on energy minister Chris Bowen’s boost to the taxpayer-underwritten scheme to support new clean power  generation and storage capacity.
“This is what we’ve been waiting for,” she said.
It provides the promise of cheaper, greener energy for consumers, both households and businesses, certainty to investors, and a sure pathway out of coal and gas for our energy generators.
A similar, albeit much smaller scheme in the ACT has resulted in consumers having among the lowest power prices in the country.
block-time published-time 4.10am GMT 
Back to northern NSW, where a man has been taken into custody as part of a police operation.
Emergency services were called to a private property on the Bruxner Highway, Wollongbar, following a concern for welfare, at about 8am today, confirmed NSW Police.
At about 2pm, a 45-year-old man was taken into custody by officers from the force’s tactical operations unit. He has been taken to Lismore Base Hospital under police guard.
The operation forced students and staff at Wollongar TAFE and nearby buildings into lockdown.
The Bruxner Highway will remain closed for “some time”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.13am GMT
block-time published-time 3.58am GMT 
Residents’ accounts of a massive and active bushfire that has destroyed 10 homes and four sheds in Wanneroo to the north of Perth are emerging.
 Sarah Kilian stayed to defend her Tapping home from the blaze that ripped through nearby market gardens and engulfed a local park after leaping a four-lane road, reports AAP.
“There was two massive fires coming down the road and smoke everywhere,” she told AAP on Thursday.
“We haven’t slept a wink.”
Ms Kilian said most of her neighbours left during the night as embers descended on their homes that border semi-rural properties.
“Lucky my hubby stomped them out. It was just scary all night – absolutely chaotic,” she said.
Smoke continues to rise from the fire grounds and a lone water bomber can be seen swooping down on bushland across a paddock of green vegetables.
    Smoke rises over Banksia Grove in the northern suburbs of Perth. Photograph: SUPPLIED/PR IMAGE    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.15am GMT
block-time published-time 3.49am GMT 
Western Australia’s department of fire and emergency services has issued a bushfire emergency warning to parts of Wanneroo as a bushfire that razed 10 homes continues to burn in the area.
The warning covers residents of the area bound by Castledene Way, Da Vinci Drive, Ashley Road, Pinjar Road, Saponara Drive, Rhoeo Outlook, Vincent Road, Garden Park Drive, Belgrade Road, Franklin Road, Trichet Road Hawkins Road, Wirrega Road, Galah Road, Silver Road, Coogee Road, Tumbleweed Drive and Joondalup Drive in Wanneroo in Perth’s north.
The DFES said:
Please note it’s too late to leave for people east of PINJAR ROAD. Shelter in place immediately.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.05am GMT
block-time published-time 3.36am GMT 
About 100 firefighters are still fighting a bushfire in Wanneroo to the north of Perth.
Overnight, firefighting teams and a “considerable aerial fleet” fought the blaze, which has burned 10 homes, four sheds and numerous vehicles and infrastructure.
DFES commissioner Darren Klemm said a number of firefighters had sustained minor injuries but none were taken to hospital.
With significant fire weather predicted for the rest of the day and the next two days, he said additional aircraft and crews were available and on stand-by across the state and country.
I have spoken to my interstate counterparts … we’ll see how today plays out – but I may consider later today the need or not to access resources from other states and territories.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.41am GMT
block-time published-time 3.23am GMT 
 Bushfires north of Perth destroy 10 homes  
Ten homes have been lost to bushfires to the north of Perth.
Western Australia acting premier Rita Saffioti said 10 homes, four sheds and numerous vehicles, including caravans, were lost in fires in Wanneroo overnight.
There’s also damage to a range of infrastructure, including power poles. But as this is a live emergency, it will take time to confirm the extent of the damage. The forecast for today is unforgiving. The temperature is expected to hit a maximum of 40 degrees, and the winds continue to be strong.
Today will be a difficult day for everybody involved, but again I want to thank all of those who have done so much to keep damage to a minimum.
Seventy to 130 people were forced to take refuge in Blossom Gum Community Centre overnight.
More to come.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.27am GMT
block-time published-time 3.09am GMT 
Back to Melbourne, where hundreds of students have broken out into a “Free, Free Palestine” chant on the steps of Melbourne’s Flinders Street station.
The students who are participating in the schools strike have spilled out onto the road to block the Flinders and Swanston steeet intersection.
Year 11 student Audra, co-organiser of the rally, tells the crowd they must continue to stand with Palestine:
To strike for Palestine, to defy our principals and politicians who tell us we don’t know what we’re talking about.
I walked out of school today with all of you to take a stand on the right side of history.
     Students gather for a Pro-Palestine demonstration in Melbourne. Photograph: James Ross/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.14am GMT
block-time published-time 3.02am GMT 
And with that I leave the blog in the hands of Daisy Dumas. Thanks for reading. 
block-time published-time 3.01am GMT 
Robbie Williams has paid tribute to the fan who died at his concert last week.
A 70-year-old woman died after a fall down some stairs at one of Williams’ shows in Sydney last week, and at a show in Melbourne last night, he acknowledged her and dedicated a song to her:
When something like this happens, it breaks my heart and I have been thinking about it an awful lot, and thought about it all the way through the show tonight, so let’s all sing up.
She was somebody just like you who came to the gig, just like you did tonight, and this is for her.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.04am GMT
block-time published-time 2.41am GMT 
Victorian students are gathering at the steps of Flinders Street station in Melbourne ahead of a planned rally to support Palestine this afternoon.
Children from schools such as Pascove Vale Girls college and Caulfield primary school have walked out of class to attend the strike. Some students are draped in the Palestinian flag while others are holding “Free Palestine” posters.
The rally has attracted backlash, with an open letter from members of Victoria’s Jewish community urging premier Jacinta Allan and education minister Ben Carroll to take a tougher stance against the strike.
Allan said she expected students to stay in school while her federal counterpart Jason Clare said pupils should be in the classroom during school hours.
A pro-Palestine schools strike in Sydney is also planned for Friday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.12am GMT
block-time published-time 2.22am GMT 
This chart has been widely shared on social media after the Commonwealth Bank’s latest cost of living insights report  showed that people of different ages are experiencing the increased cost of living in different ways.
The bank’s analysis of transaction data shows that younger people are cutting back on spending compared to the same time last year, even on essential items, while older people’s spending continues to increase (though it hasn’t increased as much as inflation over the same period for most older age groups):
Interactive
block-time published-time 2.04am GMT 
 Origin Energy delays takeover vote until 4 December after revised bid 
As  expected , Origin Energy had “adjourned” its planned shareholder vote on a $20bn bid by Brookfield and EIG after receiving a revised offer from the suitors.
That vote will now be held on 4 December rather than this afternoon, the company said , admitting that it was “unlikely” the existing scheme would have received the necessary 75% vote in favour.
Should the $9.43 a share offer not proceed, Brookfield would buy Origin’s energy markets business for $12.3bn. EIG would take over the rest, subject to a 50.1% minimum acceptance.
“In the event the Alternative Transaction proceeds, it is proposed that shareholders would receive total cash consideration of up to approximately $9.08 per Origin share,” Origin states.
“While the Alternative Transaction may present an additional opportunity for shareholders to receive cash value for their shares, the Board notes that the transaction appears inferior to the existing Scheme,” Origin said.
“The Board has significant reservations as to the complexity, conditionality and differing value, and potential adverse tax outcomes to Origin and shareholders, nevertheless the Board has a responsibility to fully assess this Revised Proposal so it can provide an informed view about its merits or otherwise to shareholders.”
Given Origin was trading at $8.42 a share before it was halted today, investors are being offered a choice of $9.43 or $9.08 (give or take). Cue a couple more weeks of intense lobbying, including on Australian Super, the main holdout on that higher offer.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24am GMT
block-time published-time 1.44am GMT 
 Lehrmann tells court he lied to his chief of staff about reason for being in office after hours  
 Bruce Lehrmann says he lied to his chief of staff, Fiona Brown, about his reason for visiting minister Linda Reynolds’ office after-hours, telling her he went there to drink whisky. Asked by his barrister Steven Whybrow SC why he said it if it was not true, he said he was “incredibly nervous” and that Brown’s “tone was tense”. “I was of a mindset that if I was to tell her that I was working on the Question Time briefs she might have took that to be an even greater security breach, with flow-on effects. Lehrmann clarified that he was referring to the possibility the AFP may become involved because he had worked on ministerial documents after hours. At that meeting, Brown told him to pack his things and hand in his pass and he carried two boxes out through the ministerial entrance without speaking to anyone.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.16am GMT
block-time published-time 1.17am GMT 
 Lehrmann denies sexually assaulting Brittany Higgins on ‘innocuous evening’ in Parliament House  
 Bruce Lehrmann has told the federal court he did not sexually assault Brittany Higgins in Parliament House and he did not see her again after they entered the ministerial office in the early hours of Saturday morning.
 Lehrmann’s barrister, Steven Whybrow SC : “Did you sexually assault Brittany Higgins in that office on that evening?”
Lehrmann: “Absolutely not.”
Whybrow: “Did you see her again after she turned right?”
Lehrmann: “I did not.”
Lehrmann said he thought the Friday night he went out and went into Parliament House “was an innocuous evening”.
Lehrmann said Higgins was not with him when he went into his office and read Question Time files and made some notes about the ministerial briefs for 30 to 40 minutes.
“I placed my phones down on my desk and read the Question Time folder which was opposite me.”
He said after he annotated the files for Question Time he picked up his phone and saw he had missed calls and he grabbed his keys and left the office.
He said did not touch his computer while he was in his office and he could not see Higgins’ workstation from where he was and had no further interaction with her.
Lehrmann said he didn’t think to tell Higgins he was leaving because he “wasn’t even sure she was still there” and he had told her earlier he was going to get what he wanted and leave.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34am GMT
block-time published-time 1.04am GMT 
 Queensland considers trial of condoms in prisons 
Queensland is considering a trial of condoms in prisons – a decade after all other Australian jurisdictions have already moved to implement them in corrective facilities.
A Queensland Corrective Services (QCS) spokesperson told Guardian Australia a working party has been established between QCS, Queensland Health and Together Union to consider a trial of condoms in prisons.
 “ Queensland Corrective Services is working closely with lead agency Queensland Health to reduce the risk of infectious diseases in correctional facilities, including consideration of evidence-based preventative measures and interventions,” they said.
“No decision has been made at this time and all elements and related issues would be evaluated and considered before any formal implementation.”
The spokesperson said “the health of prisoners and preventing the spread of communicable diseases has a significant impact on the health of the wider community.”
The sunshine state is the only jurisdiction that does not provide condoms to prisoners  – New South Wales and Western Australia started doing so in the 1990s, and every other state and territory implemented them by 2013.
Queensland last ran a trial of condoms in prisons in the 1990s.
 The World Health Organization, along with Australian health experts, have long advocated for condoms to be provided to prisoners in a bid to prevent the spread of blood-borne viruses and sexually transmitted diseases.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.12am GMT
block-time published-time 1.02am GMT 
 Police operation under way in northern NSW 
Police say that at around 8am this morning, emergency services were called to a private property on the Bruxner Highway, Wollongbar, following a concern for welfare.
In a statement, they provided very few details but said a range of teams were involved and that roads had been closed around the area:
Officers from Richmond police district remain at the scene – with assistance from PolAir, police negotiators, and the Tactical Operations Unit.
As a result of the ongoing operation, the Bruxner Highway is closed in both directions between Sneaths Road and McLeans Ridges Road.
An exclusion zone is in place, those in the vicinity of the Bruxner Highway and Lindendale Road intersection are advised to stay indoors. However there is no ongoing risk to the public.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.14am GMT
block-time published-time 12.49am GMT 
 Search under way for man missing in bushland north of Sydney 
AAP is reporting that a multi-agency search is under way for a man in his 30s, who contacted his family to say he was lost in bushland in northern Sydney.  Adrian Banciu, 33, was last seen at his home at Macquarie Park, in the city’s north, on 12 November. Five days later after he had been reported missing, Mr Banciu contacted his family and emergency services saying he was lost in bushland close to Berowra Valley national park, on Sydney’s northern outskirts. Multiple police rescue units as well as the SES and Rural Fire Service began scouring bushland near Mt Kuring-Gai to try to find him. Police believe Mr Banciu was near an aquatic centre at Hornsby on the day after he was last spotted and he then entered some bush off Galston Road at Hornsby Heights. Extensive searches have taken place since he was last heard from, but he has not been found. Police and his family have serious concerns for his welfare. Mr Banciu is described as being of Caucasian appearance, about 175cm tall with a thin build and a black beard. He was last seen wearing a maroon flannelette shirt, tan shorts and black velcro sneakers. Police have called for anyone with information about his location to contact authorities.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.17am GMT
block-time published-time 12.39am GMT 
 Confusion over status of $20bn takeover bid for Origin Energy 
Origin Energy, one of the country’s biggest electricity generators, was intending to hold a 2pm aedt shareholders vote today in Sydney on a $20bn takeover bid by Brookfield and EIS. 
(The former is a Canadian asset investor and the latter, a US-based fossil fuel firm with some Saudi Arabian backing.)
Anyway, initially pitched at a $18.7bn bid a year ago , and later sweetened to win over shareholders, the bid had looked likely to fail at today’s vote because of opposition from Australian Super. AusSuper holds about 17.5% and had looked likely to raise enough doubts among other shareholders to prevent the offer receiving the needed 75% approval.
The Australian Financial Review  has been reporting that the bidders had lobbed a “plan B”  arrangement should today’s offer fall over. It looks to be offering $9.20 a share rather than $9.43, and higher than yesterday’s close of Origin stock at $8.42. 
Origin won’t comment on any revised offer and why it might be more attractive. It’s also not clear whether the vote will be postponed, but that seems likely. In any case, the stock is in a trading halt and we expect Origin to reveal more of what’s going on soon.
Brookfield had proposed accelerating Origin’s decarbonisation, including spending $20bn-$30bn on new renewables. So a lot is at stake, one way or another.
block-time published-time 12.17am GMT 
 Lehrmann tells court he lied to security staff when he went into Parliament House with Brittany Higgins  
 Bruce Lehrmann has admitted he lied to security staff in order to get into Parliament House after midnight on the night Brittany Higgins claimed he raped her.
Lehrmann said he claimed he needed to pick up documents for the minister he worked for, Linda Reynolds, because if he told the truth about needing to pick up his house keys “that security would have said ‘bugger off and come back next week’. And I needed to get home”.
Lehrmann said security staff let him and Higgins into the house and he did not think Higgins was drunk, only moderately intoxicated.
“She was perfectly fine, functioning,” he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.20am GMT
block-time published-time 12.05am GMT 
 Lehrmann says he was ‘moderately intoxicated’ on night of alleged rape 
 Bruce Lehrmann has told the federal court he did not see Brittany Higgins “stumbling” when they left a Canberra nightclub before heading to Parliament House on the night she claims he raped her.
Lehrmann said he was “moderately intoxicated” but he had to go to his office to collect his house keys.
Lehrmann said Higgins said she also had to go to Parliament House and he offered her a lift.
“I was ordering an Uber and I offered her a lift,” Lehrmann said.
 Justice Michael Lee earlier made an order that there be no order as to costs in the matter between the ABC and Lehrmann.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.10am GMT
block-time published-time 11.47pm GMT 
 Minister's Melbourne office vandalised  
 Bill Shorten’s office has been vandalised in an apparent response to his calls to “dial down the degree of aggro” in Australia over Israel’s invasion of Gaza.
The NDIS minister and former Labor leader’s office in Moonee Ponds was covered in red paint and graffiti that read “dial down the apartheid Bill”.
He told 3AW this morning that he believed the graffiti was in response to his comments:
Obviously, someone took offence at me saying we should promote social cohesion and dial down the aggro and the confrontation.
I also said in that interview, which has obviously triggered some hoon, that the scenes in the Middle East in Palestine and Gaza and Israel are incredibly distressing.
And, of course, people have a right to have a view about it [and] they’ve got a right to express their view.
But there’s a fine line isn’t there – or maybe it’s not fine, maybe it’s a really easy line to see – where you cross over, and you’re just sort of demonising and attacking people.
     Victoria police at Bill Shorten’s electoral office in Moonee Ponds this morning. Photograph: Joel Carrett/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.00am GMT
block-time published-time 11.33pm GMT 
 Middle East ceasefire 'can't be one-sided', PM says  
 The prime minister, Anthony Albanese, says the Australian government welcomes steps towards a ceasefire in Gaza , but reiterated that it “can’t be one-sided”.
The PM, who has kept a relatively lower public profile this week after returning from Apec in San Francisco , has been on a media run this morning – holding a press conference, an awkward appearance on FM radio, and a somewhat more dignified spot on ABC Sydney just now.
It’s for the 100th anniversary of ABC radio, and in between telling some log cabin stories about Double J and his childhood, the PM was asked about the agreement in the Middle East.
“We welcome steps towards ceasefire. It can’t be one-sided, but we need to make sure that what we’ve seen occur, beginning with the terrorist action October 7, of course was just devastating,” Albanese said.
“And since then we’ve seen too much life being lost. We mourn every Palestinian and every Israeli who is innocent, who’s been a victim here. And so we welcome any steps towards ceasefire.”
Albanese went on to say they wanted to see “a long-term solution as well”.
“We want to see political settlement that leads to two states. We want to see Palestinians and Israelis living in security in the region,” he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.05am GMT
block-time published-time 11.13pm GMT 
 Lehrmann to take the stand for second day in defamation trial  
 Bruce Lehrmann will take the stand for the second day in the high-profile defamation case  this morning as his legal team takes him through the events of the night Brittany Higgins claims she was raped.
Lehrmann maintains his innocence and pleaded not guilty to one charge of sexual intercourse without consent, denying that any sexual activity had occurred.
The former Liberal staffer is suing Network Ten and its presenter Lisa Wilkinson for an interview with Higgins broadcast on The Project and online.
As Network Ten defends its reporting it has engaged the services of an international expert lip reader to examine the CCTV from the venue Higgins and Lehrmann attended on the night of the alleged rape.
 Justice Michael Lee will hear Ten’s barrister Matthew Collins argue the admissibility of the evidence after Lehrmann’s barrister said he had “concerns” about it.
“We deliberately chose an expert from the United Kingdom, who had no familiarity with either Ms Higgins or Mr Lehrmann,” Collins said late on Wednesday.
“I requested when I was reviewing footage in the course of preparing a cross examination it was kind of … surprising that no one had done it before,” Collins said. “It does provide some material which … we will say is of some significant probative weight for a couple of issues Your Honour has to decide.”
    Bruce Lehrmann arrives at the federal court yesterday. The former Liberal staffer is suing Network Ten and presenter Lisa Wilkinson. Photograph: Bianca de Marchi/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.02pm GMT 
 Whistleblower David McBride to be sentenced in March 2024  
Army whistleblower David McBride will learn of his fate next March after he pleaded guilty to three charges on Friday , including stealing commonwealth information and passing that on to journalists at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
On Thursday the ACT supreme court registrar pencilled in his sentencing date for 12 March 2024 at 10am, which is expected to last one day.
The commonwealth and McBride’s team are still in discussions over an agreed statement of facts but if an agreement isn’t reached, they will be argued in court in March.
Last Friday, Justice David Mossop ordered an intensive correction orders assessment. If granted, it means McBride could avoid jail time.
Justice Mossop on Wednesday said the reasons for his decision to uphold a commonwealth intervention to withhold key documents on national security grounds remain hidden until appropriate redactions are applied and agreed on by both parties.
That process, Justice Mossop requested, should be completed “as soon as practicable”.
The Australian government solicitor, Andrew Berger, had argued last week the release of some documents McBride had been hoping to use in his defence would be against the public interest.
“The public interest at play here is a very important one, the national security and defence of this country... indeed, we say it is harder to think of a stronger public interest than the security and defence of Australia?”
    David McBride leaves the ACT supreme court last week. He will learn of his fate next March. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.47pm GMT 
 PM rebuffs questions about visas for Gazans 
 The prime minister, Anthony Albanese, held a quick presser this morning, at Meadowbank TAFE, where he was peppered with questions about the whether granting visas to people from Gaza was a risk.
One journalist even asked how the government can ensure the refugees were “aligned with Australian values”.
Unsure if any other group of people escaping a warzone can be questioned like that before they even arrive, but here we are.
The PM batted the questions away, echoing what Penny Wong said earlier  today, that the visas were granted via the usual process:
We have an appropriate visa system and security system in place. It’s the same that has been in place for some time.
These are temporary visas, there are the same security checks that in place for people, for Australians that have been in place for this regime for a long period of time.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.29pm GMT 
 Education minister urges school students not to strike 
Ahead of a planned student strike in support of Palestine in Melbourne today, the education minister, Jason Clare, said “school students should be at school during school hours”.
Clare was on the Today Show earlier this morning, and urged students not to take part in the strike:
When school is on, students should be at school.
The key thing is if you want to change the world, get an education and that means going to school.
I have had Jewish friends saying they are worried about sending their kids to school, and Muslim people telling me they are worried about their family in Gaza. People [are] telling me about displays of antisemitism and Islamophobia on the street at the moment and that is not us. We have to work to keep our country together at this time.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.12pm GMT 
 Bowen to argue for ‘stronger progress’ at Cop28 
 The climate change and energy minister, Chris Bowen, will be attending the UN’s Climate Change Conference, or Cop28 , in Dubai next week and said on RN Breakfast he will be “arguing for stronger” progress:
We will be arguing for stronger mitigation language, we’ll be arguing for progress on things like loss and damage, global climate finance etc.
We’ve set our targets, we’ll be announcing our 2035 target in due course, but … unlike under previous management Australia will be seen at the table, arguing for progress, being very constructive partners with like-minded parties.
I’ve spent a lot of time … talking, including in the middle of the night, to my international counterparts about how we can best progress at this Cop [Conference of the Parties], last Cop Australia and others were working just to maintain the status quo, just to defend what had been done at Glasgow.
We want to see forward progress with this Cop.
     Climate change and energy minister Chris Bowen: ‘We will be arguing for stronger mitigation language.’ Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.59pm GMT 
 Emergency bushfire warning in WA 
An emergency bushfire warning has been issued for parts of Wanneroo, north of Perth, with emergency services urging locals to act immediately.
Emergency WA issued the warning for Banksia Grove, Jandabup, Mariginiup, Melaleuca, Sinagra, Tapping and Wanneroo.
It is advising residents to “act immediately to survive”: 
There is a threat to lives and homes. The alert level for this fire has been upgraded as the bushfire behaviour is escalating.
It’s too late to leave, leaving now will put your life in danger.
You need to shelter in your home in a room away from the fire front and make sure you can easily escape.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.37pm GMT 
 Black Friday shoppers warned to watch out for scammers impersonating big retailers  
Victorian police are warning shoppers to be “vigilant and wary” of scammers impersonating well-known Australian retailers over the upcoming Black Friday and Cyber Monday sale weekend.
As the associated sales heat up, police say the National Anti-Scam Centre has detected a significant increase in the number of reports of fraudulent websites that are “preying on local consumers”.
DS John Cheyne of the cybercrime squad said it was important to always check a website was secure:
An opportunistic scam like this one can end up hitting everyday Victorians where it really hurts, particularly those looking to get organised with their Christmas shopping during a cost-of-living crisis.
Scammers are creating websites which look almost identical to the genuine brand’s website, and they’re also paying for their sites to appear at the top of an internet search.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.21pm GMT 
 Hostage release essential if truce to last, Paterson says 
Rewinding to Liberal MP James Paterson’s appearance on RN Breakfast this morning, wheN he said more needs to be done to free the hostages Hamas is holding in Gaza.
Yesterday a temporary ceasefire deal was agreed between Hamas and Israel that involves the exchange of 50 hostages for at least 150 Palestinian prisoners, mostly women and children.
    Shadow minister for home affairs James Paterson. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP   
Here’s what Paterson had to say:
We don’t know how many of them are still alive, and their continued release would be essential for any continuing ceasefire because otherwise Israel continues to have a legitimate military objective.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.38pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.00pm GMT 
 Ceasefire ‘enormously significant’, Wong says 
Next, Penny Wong is asked about the ceasefire agreed between Hamas and Israel:
Well, it will be enormously significant, won’t it, for the families of hostages who are returning. And I’m sure that that will be emotional and such a relief for those families who have members of their families returning after so many weeks held in captivity.
But obviously, we need more. We need all of the hostages released. We’ve been calling for humanitarian pauses for the protection of civilian lives. We know that any ceasefire cannot be one-sided. That’s why this progress on this is important.
But ultimately, what we do need is a political process to a resolution in the Middle East. We know that there will not be peace for Israel or Palestinians unless those steps are taken.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.39pm GMT 
 Temporary visas granted to Palestinians ‘via the normal process’  
Foreign affairs minister Penny Wong says the more than 800 Palestinians granted temporary visas all applied “via the normal process”.
Wong was on ABC News Breakfast this morning and said the granting of the visas didn’t mean the applicants could leave Gaza, and that the Australian government was working to find solutions to get people out:
Some 1,800 people in Israel, and just over 800 people in Gaza, have been granted visas in accordance with normal processes. So these are people who have applied. They go through the usual security checks, the usual identity checks, the usual character checks, and have been granted visas.
What I would also say is this – obviously just because someone has an Australian visa does not mean that they are able to leave where they are. And there are many people in Gaza who we have been trying to assist. As you know, border crossings have not been opened fully.
And we spend weeks working with others to get some 127 Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate families out of Gaza. So I would make the point, the grant of visas doesn’t mean that people will be able to leave. Obviously, the situation on the ground is still very difficult.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.38pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.31pm GMT 
 Immigration detention legislation had to be rushed, Coalition says  
Opposition home affairs spokesperson James Paterson says there was “no alternative” the government had to rushing through legislation to monitor people released from indefinite immigration detention.
Speaking to RN Breakfast, Paterson said it wasn’t a mistake to rush through the legislation, even thought it is already being challenged in court:
No, there was no alternative but to rush it through, the alternative would be these people would be released into the community with no enforceable restrictions at all.
The initial visa conditions the government imposed upon them were not enforceable because the only consequence of breaching a visa was to be put into immigration detention, pending deportation.
And of course, the high court has found those people are not eligible for that because it constitutes indefinite detention.
So the choice was no restrictions in the community at all, or the best restrictions we can put in place, in a short period of time that we had.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.37pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.14pm GMT 
 ‘We need to do better’ to reach renewables target, Bowen says 
Federal energy minister Chris Bowen  has said Australia is “doing well” against its target for 82% renewables by 2030 but “not well enough”.
Speaking to ABC Radio National this morning, Bowen said Australia “needs to do better” to hit its target:
We need to do better to reach that target. We’ve had some very good progress but we need more progress, after making up for a decade of delays.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.05pm GMT 
 Good morning  
 Mostafa Rachwani is now with you to take you through the day’s news.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.14pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.57pm GMT 
 ‘Hope has to be a strategy,’ pioneering climate scientist says 
“My first thought was: Tim [ Flannery ]’s been shot,” says Lesley Hughes in the second instalment of the Weight of the world series, in which we talk to some of Australia’s first climate change scientists about the personal toll of their pioneering work.
Hughes says she thought the carbon tax debate had become so toxic that when she heard a loud noise while on stage with Flannery, who was then chair of the Climate Commission, it might be an assassination attempt. Hughes emerged from that time battle weary but optimistic:
I’ve come to the conclusion that hope has to be a strategy. You have to use hope as a motivator to keep going.
Read her account here  and also listen to the third instalment of our Weight of the world podcast  in which Hughes is joined by her peers Ove Hoegh-Guldberg  and  Graeme Pearman to look back on their life’s work. How does it feel to carry this burden of knowledge? Could they have done more? And what hope do they hold for the future?
block-time published-time 7.49pm GMT 
 Albanese presses for Middle East ceasefire at G20 virtual summit 
 Anthony Albanese has hailed steps toward a ceasefire in the Middle East during a G20 virtual summit, AAP reports.
Israel’s government and Hamas have agreed to a truce for at least four days to allow aid into the Gaza Strip and the release of at least 50 hostages captured by militants in exchange for at least 150 Palestinians jailed in Israel.
    Narendra Modi hosts the virtual G20 summit Photograph: India Press Information Bureau /EPA   
Australia was “deeply concerned by the conflict in the Middle East”, Albanese said during his opening remarks to the online meeting hosted by Indian prime minister Narendra Modi :
Australia has consistently called for the release of hostages, for humanitarian access and for the protection of civilian lives.
We have wanted to see the next steps towards a sustainable ceasefire which cannot be one-sided.
Other speakers included Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and Russian president Vladimir Putin.
“Russia’s invasion of Ukraine must end,” Albanese also said, lamenting the “adverse impacts of wars and conflicts around the world”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.41pm GMT 
 Out-of-control bushfire rages in Perth's northern suburbs  
Residents in Perth have been warned that it is too late to leave their homes as a fast-moving out-of-control bushfire spreads in two northern suburbs, Australian Associated Press reports.
An emergency warning was issued yesterday for parts of Melaleuca and Jandabup in Wanneroo, about 36km north of the city centre,
The Department of Fire and Emergency Services said:
It’s too late to leave for people east of Hawkins Road. You are in danger and need to act immediately to survive.
The fire started near the intersection of Boundary and Bustard roads in Mariginiup. It was moving fast in a westerly direction and was not contained or controlled. Emergency services said:
You need to shelter in your home in a room away from the fire front and make sure you can easily escape. You must shelter before the fire arrives, as the extreme heat will kill you well before the flames reach you.
Another bushfire in Perth’s south has been downgraded but nearby residents have been warned to remain alert.
Western Australia is experiencing a spike in temperatures, with the mercury topping 37C yesterday and forecast to hit 40C today.
No relief from the heat is expected before Monday.
block-time published-time 7.30pm GMT 
 Welcome  
Good morning and welcome to our rolling news coverage. I’m Martin Farrer and I’ll be bringing you the best of our overnight and breaaking news stories before handing the news baton to my colleague Mostafa Rachwani.
Despite rate hikes and gloomy consumer sentiment, house prices across Australia have risen 8.1%  since their slump in January. They have been driven by growth to record highs in Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, according to Corelogic, although the data firm sees the pace of price increases falling off as interest rates remain high, as indicated last night  by Reserve Bank governor Michele Bullock. She said in a speech in Sydney that the bank was braced for a “challenging” year ahead as it confronts “homegrown” price pressures which will keep inflation above the norm and force interest rates to remain higher for longer.
High property prices are also a factor in a fascinating report today  by our data expert Josh Nicholas looking how demographic change is affecting political attitudes in Australia. Voting trends show younger people are much less likely to vote for the Coalition compared with past generations, with millennials more likely to have a degree, be less religious, identify as LGBTQ+ and not have kids. Crucially they are also struggling to become homeowners. As political scientist Prof Ian McAllister says, this is “a fundamental change in society, which is going to significantly affect politics over the next 20, 30 years”.
Australia’s 100 wealthiest schools had a combined income of $4.8bn  in 2021, data reveals, as calls grow for the federal government to reduce inequality in the education system.
And a fast-moving bushfire was threatening homes in Perth’s northern suburbs overnight – we’ll have the latest on that for you soon.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Coldplay concert to go ahead in Malaysia amid opposition from conservative Muslims
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 10:22 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: MUSIC; Version:1
Length: 743 words
Byline: Ben Beaumont-Thomas
Highlight: ‘Kill switch’ to cut power in case of an ‘unwanted incident’ was discussed, but the band’s support of Palestine has endeared them to prime minister
Body


A Coldplay concert is going ahead in Malaysia on Wednesday despite opposition from conservative Muslims in the country, but the band could face a “kill switch” that cuts off the show if they seriously offend cultural sensibilities.
Following outcry over a same-sex kiss between members of the 1975  at a Kuala Lumpur concert in July, earlier this month deputy communications and digital minister Teo Nie Ching introduced a ruling that concert organisers must have “a kill switch that will cut off electricity during any performance if there is any unwanted incident”.
Communications and digital minister Fahmi Fadzilit said use of the switch is “one of the things we have discussed with the organiser” of Coldplay’s Kuala Lumpur concert, but said he didn’t foresee problems. “The prime minister has also said the band is very supportive of Palestine. So, we are upbeat about the concert today,” he said.
Prime minister Anwar Ibrahim told the country’s parliament earlier this week: “Why should we stop a group that supports the Palestinian cause from performing?” He had been asked whether the concert was inappropriate during the conflict in Gaza.
Chris Martin recently told an audience in Japan: “We don’t believe in oppression, or occupation, terrorism or genocide … you can send [love and kindness] to Gaza and Israel, you can send it to the West Bank,” also naming Azerbaijan, Armenia, Ukraine, Russia, Iran, Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2011, Coldplay promoted the charity single Freedom for Palestine on their Facebook page, and in 2019 collaborated with Palestinian band Le Trio Joubran on the song Arabesque, included on the album Everyday Life.
Conservative Muslims in Malaysia have opposed Coldplay’s concert due to the band’s support for the LGBTQ+ community. Ahmad Fadhli Shaari, information chief of Islamic party PAS, said in parliament: “This is not about whether they purely support the Palestinian cause or not but the issue of hedonism culture that they bring to our community.” In a post on social media in May, PAS called for the cancellation of the concert, saying the band encouraged “a culture of hedonism and perversion”, pairing the statement with a picture of Martin holding a rainbow flag.
Police forces and concert promoter Live Nation Malaysia have warned concertgoers not to behave provocatively, the latter asking them to be “mindful of local cultures and sensitivities”.
Last week, conservative Muslim demonstrators clashed with police outside Gelora Bung Karno stadium in Jakarta, Indonesia, where Coldplay were performing. A banner reportedly read: “Reject, cancel and disband Coldplay concerts.” Indonesian politicians also opposed the concert, with Anwar Abbas of the Indonesian Ulema Council saying: “We know that Coldplay supports LGBT+, but now the question is, is the LGBT+ behaviour in line with … our constitution? There are six religions recognised in this country, and not one of them allows and tolerates LGBT+ practice.”
Both conservative Muslims and Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ community were critical of the kiss between the 1975’s Matty Healy and Ross MacDonald on stage in Kuala Lumpur in July. The entire Good Vibes festival was cut short following the swift cancellation of the 1975’s set, prompting the festival to began legal proceedings against the band.
Healy remains unrepentant, telling a crowd at a Texas concert in October that the kiss was a longstanding part of their stage show: “To eliminate any routine part of the show in an effort to appease the Malaysian authorities’ bigoted views of LGBTQ people would be a passive endorsement of those politics. As liberals are so fond of saying, ‘Silence causes violence, use your platform’, so we did that … If you truly believe that artists have a responsibility to uphold their liberal virtues by using their massive platforms, then those artists should be judged by the danger and inconvenience that they face for doing so, not by the rewards they receive for parroting consensus.”
Coldplay, meanwhile, continue their Music of the Spheres tour , which began in March 2022 and aims to reduce carbon emissions by 50% compared with their previous world tour. Excluding the current east Asian leg, it has grossed $668m so far, and will continue into 2024 with 37 dates across Europe and Oceania. There is a conspicuous gap in their European tour schedule over the weekend of the 2024 Glastonbury festival, leading fans to hope for a fifth headline set there.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Putin says Moscow ‘ready for talks’ to end ‘tragedy’ of war but blames Kyiv for lack of discussion – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 7:09 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:26
Length: 7641 words
Byline: Jem Bartholomew and Mabel Banfield-Nwachi
Highlight: Russian president says it is necessary to stop tragedy of conflict but Kyiv law prohibiting talks has prevented it. This live blog is closedSnow in Kyiv raises fears Russia will attack Ukraine’s energy infrastructure
Body


block-time published-time 6.41pm GMT 
 Wednesday Summary  
It’s close to 9pm in Kyiv and here are the major developments from Wednesday on Ukraine’s fight against the Russian invasion.
Vladimir Putin said Russia has always been “ready for talks” to end the “tragedy” of war in Ukraine. Speaking at the virtual G20 meeting, the Russian president gave his most pacific comments yet since invading Ukraine, but then blamed Kyiv for no peace talks.Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Ukraine’s troops faced “difficult” defensive operations on parts of the eastern front, as bitter winter cold settles in. But the president added forces in the south were still conducting offensive actions.The death toll from a Russian strike on a Ukrainian hospital in Selydove rose to three people. After Tuesday’s attack, rescuers spent the night clearing rubble and discovered further casualties.The Russian foreign ministry said relations with the US were extremely thin and risked being torn at any moment. Spokesperson Maria Zakharova told reporters Washington’s actions could lead to “unpredictable consequences.”Finland prime minister Petteri Orpo said the country will shut three border crossings after Helsinki accused the Kremlin of pushing hundreds of asylum seekers to the border in recent weeks. 
It leaves just one crossing open in its 1,340km border with Russia, also the Nato and EU border.Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, is threatening to block Ukraine’s candidacy for membership of the EU. European leaders will meet on 14 and 15 December to discuss Ukraine’s EU bid.The European Council president, Charles Michel, said he expected a“difficult” meeting next month about Ukraine joining the EU. He promised to do “everything in my power” to make a decision in December.The EU has approved a further €1.5bn (£1.3bn) payment in macro financial assistance to Ukraine. It is the tenth payment made as part of an €18bn programme to keep the Ukrainian economy moving.Russia’s defence ministry said a group of Russian journalists had come under drone attack from Ukrainian forces in the Zaporizhzhia region. It said one reporter received medical treatment but no one was life-threateningly injured.A Russian independent politician was summoned to a local prosecutor’s office after declaring her intention to run in next year’s presidential election. She had been critical of the regime.The Kremlin said there were “no revisions” to its policy of pardoning prisoners in exchange for fighting in Ukraine. It followed local media reports of a Russian “satanist” killer who was released.The Ukrainian air force said it shot down 14 Shahed drones launched by Russian forcesovernight. There were no immediate reports of casualties or major damage.The US voiced concern that Iran may provide Russia with ballistic missiles for use in its war against Ukraine. The national security council spokesperson, John Kirby, said the development would probably be disastrous for the Ukrainian people.The UN human rights office said more than 10,000 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since Russia’s full-scale invasion.  It expects the real toll is significantly higher.
That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, taking charge of our live coverage of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine today. See you next time.
block-time published-time 6.19pm GMT 
A 17-year-old Russian has been sentenced to six years in a juvenile penal colony for throwing molotov cocktails at army recruitment offices, the latest ruling in Moscow’s crackdown against dissent over its invasion of Ukraine.
Yegor Balazeikin, then a student at a prestigious high school in St Petersburg specialising in social sciences, threw homemade molotov cocktails, but they failed to ignite.
Balazeikin “has no regrets” over his actions, his mother said, but according to supporters, he has suffered worsening health conditions while in custody – including autoimmune hepatitis and liver fibrosis.
AFP has a reporter at the court in St Petersburg:
Balazeikin said he had targeted the enlistment buildings in Saint Petersburg and in his hometown of Kirovsk, 30 kilometres (20 miles) east of St Petersburg, in protest at Russia’s offensive on Ukraine.
His uncle was killed a few months after volunteering to fight at the start of the conflict.
Moscow has taken a harsh line against public shows of dissent and opposition to its actions in Ukraine.
Russian courts have sentenced several individuals to multiple years in prison - also on ‘terrorism’ charges - for attempted attacks on military and government buildings.
During the trial, Balazeikin admitted to throwing the Molotov cocktails, but said he did not agree with the classification of his actions as a ‘terrorist act’.
‘I believe that if people en masse expressed their dissatisfaction - not necessarily in the way I did - it will lead to the end of this war and the saving of lives,’ the independent Sota outlet quoted him as saying in court.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.10pm GMT 
 Russia lifted a temporary ban on diesel exports on Wednesday, saying the two-month restrictions had been successful in bringing down rising fuel prices on the domestic market, AFP reports.
Moscow suspended the export of diesel and gasoline products in September in a move that roiled global markets.
The energy ministry said it had taken the measures to boost supplies inside Russia and bring down rising prices that were hitting drivers and businesses across the country.
On Wednesday, it said it was removing the restrictions after prices had dropped and domestic reserves had grown 14% to 3.2m tonnes during the two months when exports were curtailed.
It follows the lifting last month of restrictions on Russia’s seaborne diesel exports, which make up the majority, and last week’s removal of a suspension on gasoline exports.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.51pm GMT 
 Death toll from Russian strike on Ukrainian hospital rises to three people  
The death toll from a Russian strike on a hospital has risen to three people, emergency services in Ukraine ’s southern town of Selydove have said.
The strike on Tuesday damaged two hospital buildings – injuring at least eight people – and a coal mine – Reuters reports, citing local Ukrainian authorities.
After clearing rubble overnight, the state emergency service said on Telegram on Wednesday: “Another body was recovered from the rubble of the hospital building. In total, three people were killed in the missile strike.”
Moscow denies targeting civilians. But the United Nations says more than 10,000 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since Russia’s full-scale invasion. It expects the actual toll to be significantly higher.
 Related:  Can hospitals be military targets? What international law says
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.43pm GMT 
 Critical politician planning Russian presidential run summoned to prosecutor's office  
A Russian independent politician was summoned to a local prosecutor’s office after declaring her intention to run in next year’s presidential election and criticising the regime, AFP reports.
According to Freedom House , a democracy advocacy group, “the Kremlin manipulates elections and suppresses genuine dissent”.
AFP has the details on the story  here:
President Vladimir Putin is set to extend his rule  until at least 2030 in a nationwide vote next March – a contest rights groups say will be neither free nor fair.
After saying she would try to stand in the 2024 vote and criticising the current regime, prosecutors in Rzhev, a town 200 kilometres west of Moscow, called Ekaterina Duntsova, 40, in for questioning.
Officials said her post had “raised some questions, specifically about the wording of sections about war and peace, my opinion of the current government and what is happening in our country,” Duntsova told AFP in a video interview Wednesday.
In earlier social media posts, Duntsova said issues of “war and peace” affected every Russian, and said the country was “moving away from rights and freedoms, away from love and peace, away from a beautiful future.”
Any criticism of Russia’s military campaign in Ukraine is effectively illegal under sweeping censorship laws passed in the first days after Russia launched its military offensive.
 Related:  Putin sets sights on re-election but cost of war can only grow
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.35pm GMT 
The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, said he will support Ukraine as long as necessary in its fight against the Russian invasion.
At a summit in Berlin with the Italian rightwing prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, Scholz said he had called on the Russian president, Vladimir Putin,  to end the invasion of Ukraine during Wednesday’s G20 virtual meeting.
“I called on President Putin to end his attack on Ukraine and withdraw troops from Ukraine’s territory, so that this war can finally end,” he said. 
Meloni told reporters: “It is simply enough for Russia to withdraw its troops from the invaded territory”.
Scholz also announced the construction of a new energy pipeline across the Alps. “We agree that we want to expand our energy cooperation in order to strengthen long-term supply, security and transformation,” he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.09pm GMT 
 Finland to close all but one remote border crossing with Russia amid asylum seeker row  
 Finland ’s prime minister Petteri Orpo said the country will shut three border crossings – leaving just one open in its 1,340km border with Russia – after Helsinki accused the Kremlin of pushing hundreds of asylum seekers to the border in recent weeks.
Finland accuses Russia of facilitating organised illegal crossings. The border also marks the frontiers of Nato an the European Union. Estonia, another Nato and EU member, also says Russia is pushing asylum seekers to its border as a form of hybrid “warfare”.
Finland’s closures will begin at midnight on Friday. The Raja-Jooseppi crossing, in the far northern Lapland region, will remain open and asylum applications will be processed there, Reuters reports.
“The government has today decided to close more border posts,” Orpo told a press conference. “Raja-Jooseppi is the northernmost [crossing] and it requires a real effort to get there”.
Destitute and desparate people with few possessions – often from war torn countries like Syria, Yemen and Somalia – have become political footballs in a clash between Finland and Estonia against Russia at the borders of the western alliance.
    Cars at the border between Russia and Finland at the Nuijamaa border check point in Lappeenranta, Finland, on November 14, 2023. Photograph: Lauri Heino/Shutterstock    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.55pm GMT 
Following Finland, Estonia has accused Russia of pushing asylum seekers to its border crossings.
The countries share a 338.6km border, which is also the European Union and Nato border. Finland and Estonia say they have seen a surge in migrants arriving in the past two weeks and accuse Moscow of facilitating the arrivals.
The office of Estonia’s interior minister, Lauri Laanemets, told Reuters: “Unfortunately, there are many signs that Russian border officials and possibly other agencies are involved”. Laanemets added: “Quite frankly, [the] ongoing migration pressure on Europe’s eastern border is a hybrid attack operation”.
Estonia’s interior ministry said 75 people – largely from Somalia and Syria – attempted to enter from Russia since Thursday but said they were turned back.
Finland’s foreign minister on Wednesday told Reuters it demanded Russia stops sending people to the border, and said the country was considering closing all border crossings. The Kremlin denies pushing asylum seekers to the borders.
The issue has become a point of contention between the two EU and Nato members and Russia, as they tussle over the fates of asylum seekers from often war-torn countries who have few possessions and face hostility and destitution.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.36pm GMT 
 Finland ’s foreign minister demanded Russia stops sending people to the border, claiming to have evidence the Russian border service is transporting asylum seekers to crossings – as tensions between the two countries continue to simmer.
The foreign minister, Elina Valtonen, told Reuters on Wednesday that one alternative is to close the entire 1,340km border it shares with Russia – which is also the border of Nato and the EU – if asylum seekers from its neighbour continue to arrive.
Valtonen said: “We have already taken measures to close border crossing points, and if need be, we will be doing further closings.”
Helsinki has shut several crossings and is considering closing some of the four remaining border points on its Russian frontier, Reuters reports. Moscow denies sending people to the border.
Around 600 people have arrived in the past few weeks, Finland told Reuters. The asylum seekers come from a wide range of nations including Yemen, Afghanistan, Kenya, Morocco, Pakistan, Somalia and Syria, according to immigration authorities.
An announcement from Finland is expected at 5pm GMT. Earlier on Wednesday, Russia’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, said Russia would “of course” respond if Finland closes the remaining border posts.
It comes after Russia said on Wednesday it had protested to Finland after a damaged Russian tank was placed on display near the Finnish parliament.
The issue has become a point of contention between Finland and Estonia against Russia, as they tussle over the fates of asylum seekers from often war-torn countries who have few possessions and face hostility and destitution.
    Finland’s minister for foreign affairs, Elina Valtonen. Photograph: Marina Takimoto/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.15pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 6.15pm in Kyiv and here’s an update on Wednesday’s key developments in Ukraine’s war against Russia’s invasion.
Vladimir Putin said Russia has always been “ready for talks” to end the “tragedy” of war in Ukraine. Speaking at the G20 meeting, the Russian president gave his most pacific comments yet since invading Ukraine, but then blamed Kyiv for no peace talks.Volodymyr Zelenskiy said Ukraine’s troops faced “difficult” defensive operations on parts of the eastern front, as bitter winter cold settles in. But the president added forces in the south were still conducting offensive actions.The Russian foreign ministry said relations with the US were extremely thin and risked being torn at any moment. Spokesperson Maria Zakharova told reporters Washington’s actions could lead to “unpredictable consequences.”Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, is threatening to block Ukraine’s candidacy for membership of the EU. European leaders will meet on 14 and 15 December to discuss Ukraine’s EU bid.The European Council president, Charles Michel, said he expected a“difficult” meeting next month about Ukraine joining the EU. He promised to do “everything in my power” to make a decision in December.The EU has approved a further €1.5bn (£1.3bn) payment in macro financial assistance to Ukraine. It is the tenth payment made as part of an €18bn programme to keep the Ukrainian economy moving.Russia’s defence ministry said a group of Russian journalists had come under drone attack from Ukrainian forces in the Zaporizhzhia region. It said one reporter received medical treatment but no one was life-threateningly injured.Russia said on Wednesday it had protested to Finland after a damaged Russian tank was placed on display near the Finnish parliament.  Finland is an EU and Nato member and shares a 1,340km border with Russia.The Kremlin said there were “no revisions” to its policy of pardoning prisoners in exchange for fighting in Ukraine. It followed local media reports of a Russian “satanist” killer who was released.The Ukrainian air force said it shot down 14 Shahed drones launched by Russian forcesovernight. There were no immediate reports of casualties or major damage.The US voiced concern that Iran may provide Russia with ballistic missiles for use in its war against Ukraine. The national security council spokesperson, John Kirby, said the development would probably be disastrous for the Ukrainian people.The UN human rights office said more than 10,000 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since Russia’s full-scale invasion.  It expects the real toll is significantly higher.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.48pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.50pm GMT 
Electronic warfare in Ukraine is affecting air travel and unnerving pilots far from the battlefield, according to a report  in the New York Times.
“Planes are losing satellite signals, flights have been diverted and pilots have received false location reports or inaccurate warnings that they were flying close to terrain, according to European Union safety regulators and an internal airline memo,” the piece says.
Here are further details:
Radio frequency interference – intended to disrupt the satellite signals used by rockets, drones and other weaponry – spiked after Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in early 2022 and has grown even more intense this fall in the Middle East. The interference can involve jamming satellite signals by drowning them out with noise, or spoofing them – mimicking real satellite signals to trick recipients with misleading information.
The radio interference has so far not proven to be dangerous. But aircraft systems have proved largely unable to detect GPS spoofing and correct for it, according to Opsgroup, an organization that monitors changes and risks in the aviation industry. One Embraer jet bound for Dubai nearly veered into Iranian airspace in September before the pilots figured out the plane was chasing a false signal.
“We only realized there was an issue because the autopilot started turning to the left and right, so it was obvious that something was wrong,” crew members reported to Opsgroup.
Airplanes can typically fly safely without satellite signals and large commercial aircraft have at least six alternative navigation systems, pilots said. Business jets such as Dassault Falcons, Gulfstreams and Bombardiers appear to be more susceptible to signal spoofing, the European Union Aviation Safety Agency said.
The strain on aviation could be a harbinger of far-reaching economic and security problems as the weapons of electronic warfare proliferate.
     A Ukraine International Airlines plane. Photograph: Ina Fassbender/AFP/Getty    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.07pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.26pm GMT 
 Lithuania said a new package of aid to Ukraine  has arrived.
“Our commitment to assist Ukraine remains unbreakable,” the Lithuanian ministry of national defence said on X/Twitter.
enltr????One more new package of military support from Lithuania has reached Ukraine today ???? @LTU_Army  delivered 3 million units of 7.62×51 mm ammunition, remote detonation systems & winter equipment to the Ukrainian Armed Forces Our commitment to assist Ukraine remains unbreakable pic.twitter.com/IkA508EMFL
 — Lithuanian MOD ???? (@Lithuanian_MoD) November 22, 2023
The post said: “3 million units of 7.62×51 mm ammunition, remote detonation systems & winter equipment” had arrived.
“Thank you for steadfast support!” Ukraine’s Ministry of Defence replied.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.48pm GMT 
 Russia ’s defence ministry said on Wednesday that a group of Russian journalists had come under attack from Ukrainian forces in the Zaporizhzhia region, Reuters reports.
 Zaporizhzhia, in southern Ukraine, is one of four regions that Russia claims to have annexed since February 2022.
Russia said a Ukrainian drone struck a group of journalists, wounding a reporter from the Rossiya 24 state TV channel, AFP reports.
“As a result of a Ukrainian drone attack on a group of journalists, a correspondent of the Rossiya 24 TV channel, Boris Maksudov, was wounded by shrapnel,” Moscow’s defence ministry said. The injuries are not believed to be in a life-threatening, it said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.12pm GMT 
Russia said on Wednesday it had protested to Finland after a damaged Russian tank was placed on display near the Finnish parliament.
The foreign ministry spokesperson, Maria Zakharova, accusing Helsinki of “Russophobia”, said:
Why are they doing this, for what? Why do Finns need this?
The damaged Russian T-72B3 tank was put on display on Saturday in an initiative by two pro-Ukraine associations in Finland to remind people of the conflict in Ukraine, Reuters reports.
Tensions have increased between Moscow and Helsinki since Finland joined Nato earlier this year in response to the Ukraine conflict, and they rose further last week when the Nordic country closed four crossing points on its border with Russia.
Helsinki said it was responding to a surge in asylum seekers who it said were being funnelled to the border by Russia, an accusation that Moscow has denied. Zakharova blamed Finland for the problems but said:
We are open to dialogue, particularly on border-related issues.
Russia will “of course” respond if Finland closes the remaining border posts between the two countries, Zakharova said, without specifying what its reaction would be.
block-time published-time 1.40pm GMT 
 Putin says Russia 'ready for talks' to end the 'tragedy' of war in Ukraine but then blames Kyiv for no peace talks  
 Vladimir Putin has said Moscow is “ready for talks” to end the “tragedy” of war in Ukraine but blamed a Kyiv law prohibiting talks.
The Russian president launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February last year that has devastated the country and led to hundreds of thousands of casualties , both military and civilian, as well as Russian troops suspected of massacres in places such as Bucha. 
Putin used his speech at the G20 meeting to say it was necessary to think about how to stop the tragedy of the conflict in Ukraine, Reuters reports, and said Russia had never refused to participate in peace talks with Ukraine.
“Military actions are always a tragedy,” Putin said to the virtual meeting. “And of course, we should think about how to stop this tragedy,” Putin said. “By the way, Russia has never refused peace talks with Ukraine.”
 Ukraine ’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, signed a decree in October 2022  formally declaring the prospect of any Ukrainian talks with Putin “impossible” but leaving the door open to discussions with Russia.
Putin also used the speech to discuss wider geopolitical issues, saying a large share of economic activity is shifting to Asia and Africa. He said Russia had shipped grain to Africa free of charge, and emphasised the country’s willingness to contribute to global climate and development goals – in words that will be interpreted by many as attempts to spread Russia’s zones of influence further in the global south.
    Vladimir Putin holds a video conference with members of the Russian government. Photograph: Alexander Kazakov/Sputnik/Kremlin pool/EPA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.15pm GMT 
 Ukraine ’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, said the country’s troops faced “difficult” defensive operations on parts of the eastern front, as bitter winter cold settled in.
But, in a Telegram post  on Wednesday, he added that forces in the south were still conducting offensive actions.
“Difficult weather, difficult defence on the Lyman, Bakhmut, Donetsk and Avdiivka fronts. Offensive actions in the south,” Zelenskiy said. The temperature in Bakhmut is -6C.
Zelenskiy added: “The Black Sea grain corridor shows good results. The last days were a record  for the volume of transported goods.”
    Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, on Tuesday. He has warned of difficult defensive operations on the eastern front. Photograph: Maxym Marusenko/NurPhoto/Shutterstock   
Meanwhile, the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, is speaking at the G20 online summit, Russian state media Tass reports. Updates to come on that.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.57pm GMT 
 Russian foreign ministry says Russian-US relations risk 'being torn at any moment'  
The Russian foreign ministry said relations with the US were extremely thin and risked being torn at any moment, a spokesperson said at a news conference.
Maria Zakharova told reporters Washington’s actions could lead to “unpredictable consequences”.
Russia has deployed strong rhetoric since its full-scale invasion of Ukraine last year – including frequent references to nuclear weapons – as one tactic to pressure the west into dampening its support for Kyiv.
It comes as the Ukraine invasion and the Israel-Hamas war have become proxies for superpower conflict between Moscow and Washington. The US has spent billions of dollars in military and financial aid to Ukraine; and Russia has grown closer to Hamas since its attacks on Israel on 7 October, according to  the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.
You can watch Zakharova’s conference in full here. 
    Maria Zakharova, Russia’s foreign ministry’s spokesperson, has spoken of ‘unpredictable consequences’. Photograph: AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.33pm GMT 
In the US, polling from the Associated Press-Norc Center for Public Affairs Research found close to half the American public thinks the country is spending too much on aid to Ukraine.
About 45% Americans say the US government is spending too much on aid to Ukraine in the war against Russia, compared with 52% in October.
Meanwhile, the US president Joe Biden’s request for more than $61bn (£49bn) in emergency funding to support Ukraine’s defence remains stalled in Congress amid Republican opposition.
AP has further details:
Those sentiments, driven primarily by Republicans, help explain the hardening opposition among conservative GOP lawmakers on Capitol Hill who are rebuffing efforts from President Joe Biden to approve a new tranche of Ukraine aid, arguing that the money would be better spent for domestic priorities.
The shift appears to come mostly from Republicans: 59% now say too much is spent on Ukraine aid, but that’s down from 69% in October.
Nonetheless, the Republican resistance to continued Ukraine aid remains strong.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.20pm GMT 
The Romanian Black Sea port of Constanta shipped a record high 29.4m metric tons of Ukrainian grain between January and October, Reuters reports, citing the port authority.
If you want a primer on how Russia has resorted to one of the oldest forms of warfare – a food blockade – to try to crush Ukraine, read my colleague Julian Borger’s report here.
 Related:  Turning food into a weapon: how Russia resorted to one of the oldest forms of warfare
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.07pm GMT 
 Orbán threatens Hungary will block Ukraine's EU membership bid  
Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, is threatening to block Ukraine’s candidacy for membership of the EU.
He has written to the European Council president, Charles Michel, arguing that the official candidacy recommended on 8 November by the European Commission should not be endorsed by EU leaders.
“The European Council is not in a position to … agree on the future of the enlargement process unless a consensus on our future strategy towards Ukraine is found,” he wrote.
The leaders meet on 14 and 15 December with the recommendation that candidacy should be granted in mid-December high on the agenda.
But Orbán says the council leaders “must have a frank and open discussion on the feasibility of the EU’s strategic objectives in Ukraine which presently aim to achieve the military victory of Ukraine and the military defeat of Russia with the intention to induce fundamental political changes in Russia.
“Do we regard these objectives as realistically attainable?” he asks.
His letter is being seen in the context of his battle to force the EU to release €30bn (£26bn) of funding, withheld because of rule of law and corruption concerns.
    The Hungarian prime minister, Viktor Orbán, at the Fidesz party congress in Budapest on 18 November. Photograph: Bernadett Szabó/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.01pm GMT 
 Poland charges 16 people for Russian spying  
 Poland said on Wednesday it had charged 16 foreign individuals with spying for Russia, AFP reports, for allegedly preparing acts of sabotage and gathering information on military equipment deliveries to Ukraine.
The charges against the spy ring, dismantled in March, were announced by the office of the intelligence service coordinator, Mariusz Kaminski.
“Charges have been filed against 16 foreigners accused of conducting espionage activities on behalf of Russian intelligence services on Polish territory and participating in an organised criminal group,” Kaminski’s office said.
“Their assigned tasks included identifying military facilities and critical infrastructure, monitoring and documenting trains transporting military and humanitarian aid to Ukraine and preparing for train derailments,” it added.
plltr16 rosyjskich szpiegów staje przed sadem. Lubelscy prokuratorzy skierowali wlasnie akty oskarzenia przeciwko czlonkom groznej siatki szpiegowskiej - oskarzeni na zlecenie rosyjskiego wywiadu prowadzili dzialania wywiadowcze wokól portów morskich i jednostek militarnych,…
— Zbigniew Ziobro | SP (@ZiobroPL) November 22, 2023
The justice minister, Zbigniew Ziobro, said on X/Twitter, they: “Face ten years in prison each.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.50am GMT 
 EU approves further €1.5bn for Ukrainian economy  
The EU has approved a further €1.5bn (£1.3bn) payment in macro financial assistance to Ukraine.
It is the tenth payment made as part of an €18bn programme to keep the Ukrainian economy moving.
The money is used to help meet the bill for public servants wages, pensions and essential services such as hospitals, schools and housing for relocated people.
    Flags in front of the EU Commission building in Brussels. Photograph: JLBvdWolf/Alamy    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.58am GMT
block-time published-time 11.44am GMT 
 Russia stands by convict pardon policy despite 'satanist' killer release  
The Kremlin said on Wednesday there were “no revisions” to its policy of pardoning prisoners in exchange for fighting in Ukraine, AFP reports, after local media said a “satanist” killer had been released.
About 100,000 Russian prisoners have fought in Ukraine in exchange for their freedom, according to the head of an independent prisoners’ rights group Olga Romanova.
Nikolai Ogolobyak, 33, was sentenced to 20 years for the ritualistic murder of four teenagers in 2008. He was freed earlier this month after fighting in Ukraine, local media said on Tuesday.
AFP has the details:
“Now everyone is studying the pardon lists very closely,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters.
“But I repeat once again, we are talking about certain conditions that are related to being on the frontline,” he said, adding: “There have been no revisions in this regard.”
Ogolobyak and six other members of a self-proclaimed cult were handed lengthy jail terms for the gruesome murders, which took place in Russia’s Yaroslavl region 15 years ago.
The practice is controversial and local media have reported several instances of released prisoners going on to commit serious offences, including murders, after leaving the army.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.57am GMT
block-time published-time 11.30am GMT 
 Summary  
It’s 1.30pm in Kyiv and here’s an update on recent developments in Ukraine’s war against the Russian invasion today.
Overnight Ukrainian air defences shot down all 14 Shahed drones launched by Russian forces, the air force said this morning. There were no immediate reports of casualties or major damage.Meanwhile, Russia said its anti-aircraft units destroyed three Ukrainian drones over the Crimean peninsula.Russian forces hit port infrastructure in Ukraine’s southern city of Odesa on Tuesday evening, but no one was injured, the regional governor said. Ukraine is maintaining a humanitarian corridor into the Black Sea to circumvent Russia’s de facto port blockade.The US voiced concern that Iran may provide Russia with ballistic missiles for use in its war against Ukraine, a development that would probably be disastrous for the Ukrainian people, the national security council spokesperson, John Kirby, said.US president Joe Biden’s request for more than $61bn (£49bn) in emergencyUS funding to support Ukraine’s defence remains stalled in Congress. Meanwhile, Germany will support Ukraine with another military aid package worth €1.3bn ($1.4bn), the defence minister Boris Pistorius said.The Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, welcomed the “good news” of a potential four-day ceasefire in Gaza, after an Israel-Hamas breakthrough to facilitate the release of dozens of hostages in exchange for Palestinians imprisoned by Israel.The European Council president, Charles Michel, said on a visit to Kyiv he expected a“difficult” meeting next month about Ukraine joining the EU. The European Commission has recommended opening formal membership negotiations but talks cannot start unless all 27 member states agree.Michel said he’d do “everything in my power to convince my colleagues that we need a decision in December”.The new British foreign secretary, David Cameron, reiterated the UK would support Ukraine as long as it takes in its war against Russia, in his Tuesday maiden speech to the House of Lords.The UN human rights office said more than 10,000 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022, with about half of recent deaths occurring far behind the frontlines. It expects the real toll is “significantly higher”.    A Ukrainian tank crew member of the 21st Mechanised Brigade smokes next to a snow-covered German-made Leopard 2A5 battle tank near the frontline in an undisclosed location in the Lyman direction of the Donetsk region on Tuesday. Photograph: Anatolii Stepanov/AFP/Getty Images   
This is Jem Bartholomew in London taking charge of the blog for the day. Feel free to get in touch with tips and stories via email  or X/Twitter. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.55am GMT
block-time published-time 10.54am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images of Ukraine from the news wires.
    A memorial site for service people who lost their lives fighting against the Russian attack on Ukraine, in Independence Square on the first snowy day of the year in Kyiv, 22 November 2023. Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters      Oleh Shumei performs in front of the monument to the Ukrainian poet Taras Shevchenko during the commemoration of the Heavenly Hundred Heroes, who were killed in 2014 during the mass Euromaidan protest on 21 November 2023 in Lviv, Ukraine. Day of Dignity and Freedom marks the beginning of the Orange Revolution in 2004 and the Revolution of Dignity in 2013. Photograph: Global Images Ukraine/Getty      A snowy memorial wall of fallen defenders of Ukraine in the Russian-Ukrainian war in downtown Kyiv on 22 November 2023. Photograph: Roman Pilipey/AFP/Getty    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.03am GMT
block-time published-time 10.41am GMT 
Russia has welcomed a four-day ceasefire agreement in the Israel-Palestinian conflict on Wednesday and said humanitarian pauses were the only way to make progress towards a settlement.
Israel’s government and Hamas agreed earlier today to allow in aid and release at least 50 hostages  captured by militants in exchange for at least 150 Palestinians jailed in Israel during a pause to Israeli air sorties over southern Gaza that will last at least four days, Reuters reports.
The Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, told reporters:
This is the first good news from Gaza in a long time.
Russia and most countries were calling for a truce and humanitarian pauses because only on the basis of such pauses can the contours of future attempts at a sustainable settlement be built.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.06am GMT
block-time published-time 9.44am GMT 
The Kremlin declined on Wednesday to comment on a suggestion by the White House spokesperson, John Kirby, that Iran may be considering providing Russia with ballistic missiles for use in Ukraine.
At a regular news briefing, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said:
We are developing relations with Iran, including in the field of military-technical cooperation, but we do not comment on this information.
Kirby said the US would monitor the situation between Iran and Russia and take appropriate action as needed, Reuters reports.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.45am GMT
block-time published-time 8.41am GMT 
 Kira Rudik, a Ukrainian MP and the leader of the liberal Golos party, said EU security commitments to Ukraine were an “interim solution” and should not replace Nato membership.
Ukraine applied officially for Nato membership  on 30 September 2022. At the 2023 Vilnius summit, allies reaffirmed their commitment that Ukraine would become a member of the alliance, though no timeline was offered. 
In a tweet, she said:
I really appreciate the EU efforts in working out a plan on the lasting security commitments for Ukraine. But any interim solution should not replace Nato membership.
enltrI really appreciate the EU efforts in working out a plan on the lasting security commitments for Ukraine. But any interim solution should not replace NATO membership.
— Kira Rudik (@kiraincongress) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.15am GMT
block-time published-time 8.13am GMT 
The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, met with the chairman of the State Duma of the Federal Assembly of the Russian Federation, Vyacheslav Volodin, in Beijing on Wednesday, state news agency Xinhua reported.
block-time published-time 7.44am GMT 
 Russia’s energy corporation Gazprom said it would ship 42.4m cubic metres of gas to Europe via Ukraine on Wednesday, a volume in line with those of recent days, Reuters reports.
block-time published-time 7.26am GMT 
The US national security council spokesperson John Kirby also noted Iran’s announcement earlier this year that it had finalised a deal to buy Su-35 fighter jets from Russia, and said Iran was looking to buy additional military equipment from Russia, including attack helicopters, radars and combat-trainer aircraft.
Kirby said:
In total, Iran is seeking billions of dollars worth of military equipment from Russia to strengthen its military capabilities.
Russia has also been helping Iran develop and maintain its satellite collection capabilities and other space-based programs.
He said the burgeoning military partnership between Iran and Russia was harmful to Ukraine, Iran’s neighbours in the Middle East and “quite frankly to the international community”.
At the direction of the Russian government, Kirby said the Wagner mercenary group was preparing to provide an air-defence capability to either Hezbollah or Iran. He said the US would be watching to see whether that happened and was prepared to use “counter-terrorism sanctions authority against Russian individuals or entities that might make these destabilizing transfers”.
The US says the Kremlin’s reliance on Iran, as well as North Korea – countries largely isolated on the international stage for their nuclear programmes and human rights records – shows desperation.
US officials say Iran has also provided Russia with artillery and tank rounds for its invasion of Ukraine.
The US and other countries have taken steps to thwart the potential supply, sale or transfer involving Iran and ballistic missile-related items, Kirby said. The US has also issued guidance to private companies about Iranian missile procurement practices to make sure they aren’t inadvertently supporting Iran’s development efforts.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.44am GMT
block-time published-time 7.19am GMT 
 White House voices concern about Russia-Iran arms supply  
The White House has voiced concern that Iran may provide Russia with ballistic missiles for use in its war against Ukraine, a development that would probably be disastrous for the Ukrainian people, a US national security official said.
National security council spokesperson John Kirby noted that Iran has already been providing Russia with unmanned aerial vehicles or drones, guided aerial bombs and artillery ammunition, and may be preparing “to go a step further in its support for Russia”.
Kirby highlighted a September meeting in which Iran hosted the Russian defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, to show off a range of ballistic missile systems, sparking US concern. “We are therefore concerned that Iran is considering providing Russia with ballistic missiles now for use in Ukraine,” Kirby told reporters during a conference call. “In return for that support, Russia has been offering Tehran unprecedented defence cooperation, including on missiles, electronics and air defence.”
Kirby’s warning came as president Joe Biden’s request for more than $61bn in emergency US funding to continue to support Ukraine’s defence remained stalled in Congress. The additional aid for Ukraine is part of a larger $106bn funding request from the Democratic president that also would support Israel, Taiwan and the US operations on the border with Mexico.
A growing group of lawmakers in the Republican party, which controls the House of Representatives, opposes sending more money to Ukraine. Kirby and other top US officials have been urging Congress to pass aid for Ukraine, saying existing funding is drying up.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.26am GMT
block-time published-time 7.09am GMT 
 Wave of Russian drones shot down, say Ukrainians  
Good morning, this is the Guardian’s live coverage of the Russian war against Ukraine. Here are some of the most recent developments:
Ukrainian air defences shot down all 14 Shahed drones launched by Russian forces in an overnight attack, the air force said this morning. The attack on Ukraine’s central, south-eastern, and western regions lasted from 8pm on Tuesday until 3am on Wednesday. There were no immediate reports of casualties or major damage.The air force also said that the Russian military launched an X-22 missile in Zaporizhzhia region in the south-east but the missile failed to reach its target, falling into a field.For their part, the Russians said their anti-aircraft units destroyed three Ukrainian drones over the Crimean peninsula.The White House says it is concerned Iran may provide ballistic missiles to Russia to use against Ukraine. “In return for that support, Russia has been offering Tehran unprecedented defence cooperation, including on missiles, electronics and air defence,” said John Kirby, US national security council spokesperson.President Joe Biden’s request for more than $61bn in emergency US funding to support Ukraine’s defence remains stalled in Congress. The US defence secretary, Lloyd Austin, has announced the Pentagon will in any case be sending an additional $100m in weapons to Ukraine from existing US stockpiles, including  another  Himars mobile artillery system.More than 10,000 civilians have been killed in Ukraine since Russia’s full-scale invasion in February 2022, with about half of recent deaths occurring far behind the frontlines, the UN human rights office said. Its mission in Ukraine, which has dozens of monitors, said it expected the real toll to be “significantly higher” since its work was continuing.Germany will support Ukraine with a further military aid package worth €1.3bn (£1.1bn) that will include an additional IRIS-T air defence unit, Germany’s defence minister, Boris Pistorius, has said.Russia has not used its “premier air-launched cruise missiles” from its heavy bombers for nearly two months, likely allowing it to build up a substantial stock  that could be used  in a repeat of last year’s campaign to destroy Ukraine’s critical national infrastructure, the UK Ministry of Defence has said in an intelligence update.Russian forces hit port infrastructure in Ukraine’s southern city of Odesa on Tuesday evening, the regional governor said, adding that no one was injured. The Ukrainian southern military command also reported strikes on the Belhorod-Dniester district south-west of Odesa, with missiles hitting open ground and administrative buildings. Ukraine is maintaining a humanitarian corridor into the Black Sea to circumvent Russia’s de facto port blockade.A Slovakian border crossing with Ukraine was blocked on Tuesday, it was reported, although the Slovakian haulers’ union played it down as involving a single truck. Ukrainian truckers have been exempt from seeking border crossing permits since Russia’s invasion. Polish and Slovakian drivers say that has undercut business and they want restrictions imposed.The European Council’s president, Charles Michel, on a visit to Kyiv said he expected a “difficult” meeting next month about Ukraine joining the EU. The European Commission has recommended opening formal membership negotiations but talks cannot start unless all 27 member states agree.“I will do everything in my power to convince my colleagues that we need a decision in December,” Michel told the Ukrainian president. Volodymyr Zelenskiy was quoted by AFP as saying: “We believe that the EU will be ready to do its part … so that by the end of the year in December, the result will be a political decision to start accession negotiations.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.25am GMT

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Morning Mail: house prices back at record level, Australia’s generational shift, blast at US-Canada border
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 7:47 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1365 words
Byline: Martin Farrer
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Morning Mail here, and finish your day with our Afternoon Update newsletter
Body


Morning, everyone. It’s perhaps not news to people looking for a home they can afford to buy, but Australian house prices are back at record levels after recovering to last year’s peak. As we examine this trend it also links directly to a special report this morning on how the political outlook of younger Australians is changing as they experience a “new kind of adulthood” where home ownership and children come much later in life, if at all. Plus we have the second part of our Weight of the world series on climate change.
Overseas there’s breaking news of an explosion at the Rainbow Bridge in Niagara Falls on the US-Canada border. And a four-day truce is due to begin in Gaza later today.
                   Australia                                                                   ‘Tim’s been shot’ | “My first thought was: Tim [Flannery]’s been shot,” says Lesley Hughes  in the second instalment of the Weight of the world series, in which we talk to some of Australia’s first climate change scientists about the personal toll of their pioneering work. Hughes says she thought the carbon tax debate had become so toxic that when she heard a loud noise while on stage with Flannery, who was then chair of the Climate Commission, it might be an assassination attempt. Hughes emerged from that time battle weary but optimistic. “I’ve come to the conclusion that hope has to be a strategy,” she says.                                                                      ‘Counterintuitive’ | Despite rate hikes and gloomy consumer sentiment, house prices across Australia have risen 8.1%  since their slump in January. But Corelogic sees the pace of price increases falling off as interest rates remain high, as indicated by Reserve Bank governor Michelle Bullock last night.                                                                      Exclusive | Australia’s 100 wealthiest schools had a combined income of $4.8bn in 2021, data reveals , as calls grow for the federal government to reduce inequality in the education system.                                                                     Detention call | The Coalition and Greens want  Clare O’Neil to release the government’s legal advice on indefinite detention, with the opposition claiming that the home affairs minister may have already revealed its contents publicly.                                                                     Power push | The Albanese government will radically expand funding for clean power  generation and storage capacity as it tries to keep on course to meet its objective of 82% renewable energy  by 2030.                                                           World                                                                   Ceasefire due | A four-day ceasefire is due to come into force in Gaza on Thursday morning local time  but more than 100 Palestinians were reported killed  as Israeli forces continued attacking the enclave before the deal came into force. Aid agencies say the truce will be too short  to be provide humanitarian relief to Gaza’s 2.3 million people.                                                                     Border blast | The FBI is investigating a vehicle explosion at the Rainbow Bridge, a border crossing between the US and Canada in Niagara Falls. Follow this breaking story  live.                                                                     Trump alarm | Donald Trump’s threats to weaponise the justice system in pursuit of his enemies poses a direct threat to the rule of law and democracy  in the US should he win a second term, experts say.                                                                     Cameron inquiry | Britain’s foreign secretar,y David Cameron, is being investigated  over whether he fully disclosed taxable perks such as flights on private planes when he worked for the collapsed Australian lender Greensill Capital.                                                                     Washington warning | A plot to kill a Sikh separatist in the US has been thwarted  and Washington has issued a warning to India over concerns its government was involved, according to reports.                                                           Full Story                   
                     The climate scientists who hold out hope – Weight of the world part three                   
In the final part of this three-part series, Lesley Hughes, Ove Hoegh-Guldberg and Graeme Pearman look back on their life’s work.  How does it feel to carry this burden of knowledge? Could they have done more? And what hope do they hold for the future?
                   In-depth                   
A fascinating report today by our data expert Josh Nicholas looks how demographic change is affecting political attitudes  in Australia. Voting trends show younger people are much less likely to vote for the Coalition compared with past generations, with millennials more likely to have a degree, be less religious, identify as LGBTQ+ and not have kids or own a home. The political scientist Prof Ian McAllister says this is “a fundamental change in society, which is going to significantly affect politics over the next 20, 30 years”.
                   Not the news                   
Stan’s new seasonal offering – Jones Family Christmas – is an upbeat Chrissy-gone-wrong dramedy featuring a setting in the middle of nowhere and stinking hot weather. What can go wrong? Well, plenty, of course, but Luke Buckmaster feels  that although it yearns to be “a poignantly and powerfully atmospheric work” it falls short.
                   The world of sport                                                                   AFLW | After challenges travelling during Covid, the AFLW’s tally has of Irish players has jumped from 22 to 33 this season, with an immediate impact  on their teams’ performances.                                                                     Premier League | VAR officials in England have been urged  to speak out on “soft” penalties  after a succession of controversial rulings.                                                                     Tennis | Cameron Norrie has said he will approach Novak Djokovic as “just another player”  when he leads the Great Britain team against Serbia later toda,y while Alex de Minaur must beat Czech No 1 Jiri Lehecka to keep Australia in the competition in Malaga.                                                           Media roundup                   
Australia is “doubling down on a dumb strategy”  of immigration to boost economic growth, a renowned economist argues in the Financial Review. The Age reports that windfarms and solar power face tax increases  in Victoria. The Adelaide Advertiser reports that Jodie Jewell was planning to start a new life before she was found shot dead  in her home, sparking a hunt for her alleged killer.
                   What’s happening today                                                                   Melbourne | School students are being encouraged to walk out of class at 12.30pm for a rally in the CBD.                                                                     Brisbane | A second pre-hearings conference will be held before the inquest into the shooting of two police officers and resident at Wieambilla.                                                                     Sydney | Journalists will gather for the Walkley media awards.                                                           Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Morning Mail update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And finish your day with a three-minute snapshot of the day’s main news. Sign up for our Afternoon Update newsletter here. 
Prefer notifications? If you’re reading this in our app , just click here and tap “Get notifications” on the next screen  for an instant alert when we publish every morning.
                   Brain teaser                   
And finally, here are the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow. 
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Jeremy Hunt cuts national insurance but UK tax burden set to hit high amid plummeting living standards – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 9:24 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITICS; Version:25
Length: 17377 words
Byline: Nadeem Badshah (now); Andrew Sparrow and Graeme Wearden (earlier)
Highlight: Chancellor cuts national insurance but OBR says UK facing biggest fall in living standards since records beganAutumn statement - key points at a glanceJeremy Hunt’s autumn statement tax cuts fuel talk of spring election
Body


block-time published-time 8.19pm GMT 
 Closing summary  
That’s it for our coverage of the autumn statement today. Here is a roundup of our coverage of the day’s events
Jeremy Hunt’s autumn statement tax cuts fuel talk of spring election Key points at a glance Political analysisChancellor’s tax cut opens door to early election – and sets a trap for Labour | Rowena Mason Business analysisA ‘live now, pay later’ autumn statement – and yet election year still looks bleak | Larry Elliott Conservative MPs urge Jeremy Hunt to go further on tax cuts Thousands on disability benefits to lose extra £5,000 a year in autumn statement Sketch Jeremy Hunt delivers a budget designed to destroy a future chancellor | John Crace What it means for you How will your income change?
block-time published-time 7.50pm GMT 
The head of a childcare company backed by the prime minister’s wife has attacked the government following the autumn statement , accusing ministers of letting nurseries go bust, writes Kiran Stacey and Alexandra Topping.
Rachel Carrell, chief executive of Koru Kids, criticised a failure to allocate extra money for the childcare sector despite many providers saying that they could go out of business  under reforms brought in earlier this year.
Jeremy Hunt announced at the budget in March  that he would allow more parents to benefit from 30 free hours of childcare, extending the offer to children aged nine months and over. The chancellor allocated £4bn to pay for the expanded offer, but many providers have said this will not be enough to prevent them going bankrupt.
 Related:  Hunt criticised by boss of childcare company that Sunak’s wife invests in
block-time published-time 7.33pm GMT 
The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, unveiled plans that could eventually give UK workers one pension pot for life – but there were warnings that it could be an administrative “nightmare”.
The shake-up is aimed at tackling the problem of millions of small pension pots being generated – which often then end up being forgotten about – as savers change jobs during their working lives.
The Treasury said it was launching a call for evidence on a “lifetime provider” model that would simplify the market by allowing savers to ask employers to pay into one portable pension pot. The pot could be moved from one job to the next.
The Treasury said  the measure would provide savers with “greater agency and control over their pension”.
Responding to the announcement, Rachel Vahey, head of policy development at investment platform AJ Bell, said: “Some estimates suggest the average worker changes employer around 11 times during their career, with each job hop potentially creating a new pension with a new provider.”
 Related:  Hunt’s pension ‘pot for life’ idea would be nightmare to establish, experts say
block-time published-time 7.16pm GMT 
Jeremy Hunt said he would look to cut income tax at the next budget “if it is responsible to do so”.
Asked whether taxes were going up or down under the current government, the Chancellor told Sky News: “We haven’t got to the end of the Parliament yet, so I can’t answer that question.
“But what I can say is that my commitment to voters is that, when I had a chance to lighten the tax burden… I’m a Conservative, I believe in doing so.
“We have made a start. I don’t pretend, I’ve never pretended that we were going to get there in one go.
“But what we can say is that, now we’ve halved inflation, the economy has turned a corner, we can focus on the long-term growth, raising incomes and salaries for families up and down the country.”
Asked whether income tax could be cut in the spring budget, Hunt said: “What I will do is exactly what I’ve done this time. If it is responsible to do so, if we can do so without increasing borrowing, then of course as a Conservative, I would like to bring down the tax burden.
“But I will only do so in a responsible way and one that doesn’t fuel inflation after the great success we’ve had in halving it.”
block-time published-time 7.08pm GMT 
Jeremy Hunt has paved the way for a renewed period of “implausible austerity” after announcing deep real-terms cuts to public spending after the next election.
Hunt has projected day-to-day departmental expenditure increasing by an average of just 0.9% in real terms from 2025, with public investment spending fixed in cash terms, leaving a future government with a “stark choice” between further tax rises or making deep cuts to public service  s.
The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) appeared to cast doubt on the feasibility of the government’s tight post-election spending plans in its assessment of the chancellor’s autumn statement.
The OBR warned persistently high inflation  would slash the real value of government departmental spending by £19.1bn by 2027-28, compared with its estimates from the spring.
The watchdog made clear that would “present challenges”, including for local councils. It pointed to the fact that demand for public services is expected to grow and warned that local authorities’ abilities to borrow and spend would be constrained.
 Related:  Hunt ‘will create implausible austerity with post-election public spending cuts’
block-time published-time 7.02pm GMT 
Two thirds (67%) of UK adults support the National Insurance rate cut from 12% to 10% announced in today’s Autumn Statement, with just one in eight (12%) opposing it, according to a snap reactions poll from Savanta.
The poll, conducted in the wake of the Chancellor’s statement to the House of Commons, finds a majority (58%) broadly support the package of policies announced by the Chancellor today, including almost three-quarters (72%) of those that voted Conservative in 2019.
However, despite the popular package announced today, almost half (49%) of all UK adults disagree with the Chancellor’s assertion that the government’s economic plan for the country is working, including a third (35%) of 2019 Conservative voters.
block-time published-time 6.47pm GMT 
Speaking in a pre-recorded interview on Peston, which airs on ITV1 at 10.45pm today, Chancellor Jeremy Hunt MP admitted his new measures for growth would take a long time to kick in. 
“The supply side measures, the measures that will boost investment in the economy by businesses, which is the way we get productivity, salaries, living standards up, they will take a decade to happen.”
Asked about the OBR downgrading its prediction for the UK’s growth rate to 1.6 percent, Hunt implied it had been too optimistic previously, saying: “Well, in fairness, the OBR were the most optimistic of all the forecasters. They’ve just changed their growth rate to the average of other forecasts.”
block-time published-time 6.39pm GMT 
Christine Espley, a self-employed 61-year-old chef and caterer from Cirencester, has been unable to work since the summer because of extreme mobility issues. She has been waiting 47 weeks for a hip operation and fears she may lose her small benefit income because of planned changes to the welfare system.
People with mobility and mental health problems will be asked to work from home or lose benefits as part of what a UK government minister described this week as doing “their duty”.  The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, doubled down on the controversial policy in his autumn statement on Wednesday , claiming that the government’s so-called back-to-work plan would help nearly 700,000 people with health conditions find work.
In December last year, Espley was referred to a consultant who agreed that hip replacement surgery was necessary. “I’ve been waiting for 47 weeks,” she said.
 Related:  ‘Made to feel like a scrounger’: chef waiting for hip operation fears losing £84-a-week benefit
block-time published-time 6.28pm GMT 
 Jeremy Hunt says it will 'take time' to reduce overall tax burden  
Chancellor Jeremy Hunt said he accepted it is “going to take time” to reduce the overall tax burden. 
The senior Conservative made the comment when it was put to him that taxes for some people would still rise due to tax thresholds remaining frozen, despite national insurance being cut in the autumn statement.
He told Sky News: “If you’re trying to say that it is going to take time to get taxes down to the levels they were, then I agree.
“But what I said was that, when it was responsible to do so, when it wouldn’t affect inflation, I would make a start.
“We have done that today and we are a party that believes that, if we want to grow the economy, then we need to have a lightly taxed economy.
“And we have made a step which, by the way, for someone on average earnings is going to be about £450, so it is not insignificant.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.21pm GMT 
Jeremy Hunt has gone from “hero to zero on social care”, according to campaigners who branded the absence of any new funding commitments to the struggling sector “shameful”.
The only mention of social care in this week’s autumn statement was to “reaffirm” the commitments made at the 2022 statement, when the government pledged to make available up to £14.1 billion for the NHS and adult social care.
Age UK noted the 2019 pledge by then-prime minister Boris Johnson to “fix the crisis in social care once and for all” and said Wednesday’s statement was “a reminder of how desperately short the government has fallen”.
The Carers Trust said it was “shameful” than none of 110 measures announced by the Chancellor “gets anywhere near easing a social care crisis that is causing so much suffering for so many”.
Carers UK described it as “bitterly disappointing that the government has – yet again – failed to acknowledge the devastating impact the lack of funding for health and social care services is having on millions of unpaid carers supporting older and disabled family members”.
Meanwhile, the Children’s Charities Coalition, which includes Barnardo’s, The Children’s Society, National Children’s Bureau and NSPCC, said young people are being “left behind in the UK” as they urged a significant investment in children’s social care.
block-time published-time 6.06pm GMT 
 George Osborne says Hunt has now made it easier for Sunak to call election in May  
 George Osborne, the Conservative former chancellor, thinks Jeremy Hunt’s autumn statement is partly about making a May general election an option. But Osborne does not necessarily think it will happen. This is what he said today on his Political Currency podcast with Ed Balls.
A lot of people … are going to conclude that [this makes a May election more likely.] And for this reason, [Hunt has] delivered a tax cut and he’s insisted that it’s taking effect from January. In other words, you’re going to start to feel the effects by May. 
He’s not cut income tax, which leaves open a cut in income tax in a spring budget, and the Conservatives now know, if the forecasts are right, that they’re not going to be fighting the election in the autumn against a backdrop of an improving economy and falling inflation. In fact, things are going to feel pretty stagnant next year. 
I had already detected and picked up talk of potentially an earlier election. At least as an option. Because they’ve got other issues as well. The Rwanda judgments and all of that. The longer they leave it might make it worse. 
Personally, I think any prime minister may think they might want to go to the country in May. But when they are 20-odd points behind in the polls and assuming that hasn’t changed dramatically by May, they’re going to go, ‘maybe I’ll wait till the autumn or maybe even wait till the beginning of 2025’ ….
But I’ll tell you what Jeremy Hunt is doing. He is following the Lynton Crosby law, which is: you can’t fatten the pig on market day. Lynton Crosby is the Tory election strategist of previous elections who told us as MPs – I remember I was a pretty young MP in 2005 – that you can’t just fire all your ammunition at the general election, you have to make your party attractive and you need to make people feel the benefits of your policies in the many, many months in the run up to that election. 
So I think Jeremy Hunt is opening the door to a May election, even though I think it’s unlikely Rishi Sunak will walk through it.
That’s all from Graeme Wearden and me for today. Nadeem Badshah is now taking over.
block-time published-time 6.00pm GMT 
 The New Economics Foundation have calculated that the poorest quarter of households will be £210 per week short of an acceptable standard of living by April 2024. 
NEF warns the measures announced by the Chancellor today fail to protect those who are struggling the most.
Since April 2022, they say, the gap to an acceptable standard of living will have grown by £40 per week for the poorest quarter of households.
This is based on the minimum income standard (MIS), a measure of what people consider to be an acceptable standard of living.
enltr??NEW: Following the Autumn Statement, our analysis shows the poorest quarter of households will be over £200 a week short of what they need for an acceptable standard of living by April 2024. The reality is this budget will make people poorer. pic.twitter.com/GBNXINRVCc
 — NEF (@NEF) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.31am GMT
block-time published-time 5.53pm GMT 
Jeremy Hunt did not announce the removal of VAT on period pants in his speech. But it’s in the autumn statement. “The government will extend the scope of the current VAT zero rate relief on women’s sanitary products to include reusable period underwear from 1 January 2024,” the Treasury says.
block-time published-time 5.48pm GMT 
Here are some of the key charts from today’s autumn statement:
Interactive Interactive Interactive Interactive Interactive Interactive
block-time published-time 5.41pm GMT 
Today’s autumn statement was the Conservative government’s first major attempt to claw back a 20% deficit with Labour in the polls, say analysts at Investec, the financial services firm, as “a probable General Election looms in October next year”.
But they warn that Hunt may have little extra firepower left for the next budget in March.
In a note titled Autumn Statement reaction - The Hunt for a blue October,  they say:
In a somewhat different version of Groundhog Day, Mr Hunt will have to go through this all again in the spring when he presents his main Budget. 
How much pressure he comes under to cut taxes again is of course unknown, but it is difficult to envisage him with much more firepower. 
Overall the Chancellor and the Conservative benches were looking ebullient in parliament today. Time will tell if today’s Autumn Statement and any other policy measures help regain the initiative ahead of the next election.
block-time published-time 5.39pm GMT 
Rishi Sunak and Mel Stride offered Jeremy Hunt congratulations as he sat down.
    Rishi Sunak and Mel Stride congratulating Jeremy Hunt after he delivered his autumn statement in the Commons.  Photograph: Jessica Taylor/UK PARLIAMENT/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.47pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.34pm GMT 
 The City of London has reacted much more calmly to today’s autumn statement than it did after Kwasi Kwarteng’s mini-budget of September 2022. 
Bond prices have fallen a little today, after traders learned that Jeremy Hunt was spending most of the fiscal windfall he received from lower borrowing this year.
The Debt Management Office said today it planned to sell £237.3bn of gilts (UK debt) this year, higher than the £222.8bn expected by traders.
That has pushed up bond yields (the interest rate on the debt), as investors anticipated more gilts hitting the market than expected.
The pound has dropped by around half a cent against the US dollar to $1.2483, and has also slipped against the euro.
block-time published-time 5.33pm GMT 
 Richest 20% of households will gain almost half money spent on Hunt's tax cuts, IPPR thinktank says  
The rich will benefit most from the cuts to national insurance announced today, the IPPR thinktank says. That also mean people in London and the south-east of England will gain most.
The left-leaning thinktank has issued a briefing illustrating this with three charts.
This one shows which households gain the most. It says the richest 20% will get almost half of the money available. Or, as it puts it, “for every £100 Hunt spent on personal tax cuts, £46 will benefit the richest fifth of households. Only £3 of every £100 of tax cuts will go to the worst-off families.”
    Distributional impact of tax cuts Photograph: IPPR   
This one shows how much workers on different salaries will gain, both in cash terms per week and as a proportion of their post-tax income. The best paid people gain most in cash terms, and people in the top half for earnings, but not at the very top, gain most proportionally.
    Distributional impact of tax cuts Photograph: IPPR   
And this chart shows how gains are spread geographically. It says:
London and the south-east of England are the biggest winners with an average annual gain per working age person of £316 and £290 respectively. Those in the north-east, Yorkshire and the Humber, and Wales see the smallest benefit, with average gains of £192, £214, and £211 respectively. 
     How tax gains in autumn statement are spread geographically Photograph: IPPR   
Commenting on the findings, Henry Parkes, principal economist and head of quantitative research at IPPR, said: 
There are many reasons why now is not the time for tax cuts; but even less so when the principal beneficiaries of today’s changes will be the best off households, rather than those worst hit by the continuing cost-of-living crisis. They also disproportionately benefit the richest areas of the country most – the opposite of levelling up.
More broadly these tax cuts are accompanied by plans to make deep cuts in public services and investment in the future - an approach that commands very little support from the public and will make it harder, not easier, for the UK economy to grow as it needs to.
block-time published-time 5.07pm GMT 
 Hunt thanks Tory MPs pledging not to vote for tax rises that increase overall tax burden  
More than 30 Conservative MPs have backed a campaign led by Sir Jake Berry, a former party chair, which involves them signing a pledge not to vote for new taxes that increase the overall tax burden.
 Jeremy Hunt has now written to Berry assuring him that there is nothing in the autumn statement that goes against this. He says the OBR has confirmed that the measures in it will lower the tax burden. The Sun’s Harry Cole has posted the letter on X.
Hunt letter to Jake Berry over “tax pledge” signed by 20+ MPs threatening to vote against new taxes: “I can confirm that AS contains no new taxes that raise tax burden and indeed the OBR has confirmed that the package of measures will lower tax burden by 0.7 ppt in 28-29.”
enltrEXC: Hunt letter to Jake Berry over "tax pledge" signed by 20+ MPs threatening to vote against new taxes: "I can confirm that AS contains no new taxes that raise tax burden and indeed the OBR has confirmed that the package of measures will lower tax burden by 0.7 ppt in 28-29." pic.twitter.com/se3VQDYFxr
 — Harry Cole (@MrHarryCole) November 22, 2023
By “lower the tax burden”, Hunt means stop it going up even by ever more than it is already going up. (See 1.45pm. )
In his letter, Hunt also thanks Berry for his campaigning “on this important issue”. Normally a chancellor would not be happy about backbench MPs giving pledges to voters that could in theory lead to them refusing to support a government budget. But Hunt and Rishi Sunak are not strong enough to pick a fight with the many Tories backing the campaign. They also want the overall tax burden to fall (although they have not themselves committed the government to never again putting taxes up).
UPDATE: Cole subsequently posted this on X about Berry’s reaction.
Berry to the 36 tax pledge MPs on Whatsapp: “note that the tax burden will (sadly) rise, however, that was voted on in the last budget. The value of the pledge is it says ‘never again!... I think we can all afford a gentle pat on our own back for having stopped the rot! Jake”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.04am GMT
block-time published-time 4.36pm GMT 
 Hunt accused of prioritising pints over childcare  
 The rabbit out of the hat in the last budget was the surprise announcement of a £4bn funding boost to fund subsidised childcare  for parents struggling to pay some of the highest costs in the OECD. 
But today, early years providers said today’s budget “prioritised pints over childcare” – referencing the fact that pubs and other smaller hospitality, leisure and retail businesses were given a tax break , but not 60,000 early years providers – and undermined the stability of the sector.
 Sarah Ronan, director of the Early Education and Childcare Coalition, said the uplift in the minimum wage was welcome for low-paid staff in the sector but would endanger providers unless the hourly rate they are paid by the government to provide “free” childcare hours to parents were significantly increased.
Ronan said:
“Failing to do that is placing providers in a perilous financial position and is likely to lead to more closures at a time when the government should be shoring up the sector,”
 Joeli Brearley, CEO of the campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed, said:
“The irony of an autumn statement on Equal Pay Day  which prioritises pints over childcare was not lost on us. The government clearly thinks the crumbs they offered parents during the Spring Statement is enough - it is not.
Unfortunately, we won’t see the impact until April when parents struggle to access the childcare funding they were promised, because there are no places available.“
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.28pm GMT 
 OBR says almost half of Hunt's autumn statement 'headroom' explained by fuel duty rise that's unlikely to happen  
The autumn statement assumes that, at the end of the forecast period (2028-29), the Treasury will have “headroom” (spare cash) worth £13bn, or 0.4% of GDP. Jeremy Hunt boasted about this in his speech , saying:
We therefore meet our fiscal rule to have underlying debt falling as a percentage of GDP in the final year of the forecast, with double the headroom compared to the OBR’s March forecast.
But the OBR in its report  says that almost half of this “headroom” is explained by a forecast rise in fuel duty that will probably never happen.
It also suggests that £13bn is not much to boast about anyway and that, without the proposed spending cuts deemed unrealistic (see 3.02pm  ), Hunt would not have any headroom at all. It says:
Headroom of £13bn is considerably lower than the average of £29.7bn that chancellors have held against their fiscal rules since 2010. Our forecast again incorporates £6.2bn of extra revenue in 2028-29 from the government’s stated policy of increasing fuel duty rates in line with RPI inflation and the reversal of the ‘temporary’ 5p cut. If, like all chancellors since 2011, rates are instead held at the current rate then more than 43% of the headroom in 2028-29 would be removed and debt would no longer be falling in 2027-28. The current headroom is also less than it would have cost to maintain the real value of departmental spending at the same level as in our March forecast.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.27pm GMT 
 The alcohol and pubs industries have toasted measures in the autumn statement  aimed at providing some relief to the struggling sector. The chancellor, Jeremy Hunt, froze alcohol duty and extended 75% business rates relief for hospitality and leisure firms, prolonging a measure initially introduced to help an industry that was hit harder than most by social distancing and lockdowns during the pandemic. The tax break was due to end on 1 August, fuelling fears of a sudden increase in costs that would have been nearly £13,000 a year for the average pub against a backdrop of rising closure rates. Relief will now last for another year. Hunt also froze the small business rates multiplier, the methodology used to calculate bills for the tax. The British Beer & Pubs Association said the measures would save the sector £350m a year, while the Wine & Spirits Trade Association called the duty freeze in particular a “huge relief”.  Nick Mackenzie, chief executive of pubs and brewing company Greene King, said the measures would “help provide vital respite’ to pubs struggling with high costs in other areas. However, he and others in the pub industry highlighted concerns about rising staff costs and the ongoing pain caused by inflation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.26pm GMT 
 Jeremy Hunt has handed “implausible plans to cut public spending” ( see earlier post  ) to the winner of the next election, says the Resolution Foundation.
In their rapid analysis of the autumn statement, Resolution say that pre-election giveaways have arrived early with the biggest tax cuts since 1988 (if you ignore Liz Truss’s proposals, which were largely abandoned).
But even so, tax as a share of GDP is still set to rise by 4.5 percentage points (or £4,300 per household) between 2019-20 and 2028-29, they calculate.
 Torsten Bell, chief executive at the Resolution Foundation,  said:
“Today the chancellor used an inflation-driven surge in tax receipts to go early on pre-election giveaways – announcing the biggest package of tax cuts since 1988. In doing so, the chancellor has rightly prioritised workers’ earnings and firms’ investment plans. Raising the local housing allowance will also help 1.6 million households struggling with surging rents.
“But the truth is taxes are up not down. Today’s cuts are dwarfed by tax rises already under way. By the end of this decade taxes are set to be up by the equivalent of £4,300 per household compared to 2019.
“Worse, the giveaways announced today are funded by handing whoever wins the next election implausibly large spending cuts. Tax cuts to boost business investment are welcome, but undermined by plans to cut public investment by over a third – it’s hard to think of a more anti-growth policy.”
enltr???? RF analysis on the Chancellor's Autumn Statement. Pre-election giveaways arrive early with biggest tax cuts since 1988, but taxes are UP not down – rising by *£4,300* per household. More info here ?? https://t.co/ejB8VLKkuz pic.twitter.com/BgrcONHxHw
 — Resolution Foundation (@resfoundation) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.23pm GMT 
 Growth in take-up of electric cars slashed  
 The OBR has radically reduced its expectations for the take-up of electric vehicles in the UK over the next seven years, and warned that the government’s decision to delay the ban on new petrol and diesel car sales from 2030 to 2035  may dissuade car buyers to go electric. 
The OBR also points to the increased cost of financing purchases and the smaller difference in EV running costs compared with fossil fuel cars.
Its latest forecast says just 38% of new vehicles sold in the UK in 2027 will be electric, down from the 67% it forecast in March.
Growth in EV sales has already slowed, partly due to higher electricity prices and lower pump prices for petrol cars, as well as higher interest rates.
The OBR now expects uptake to track the ZEV mandate, which forces manufacturers to sell a certain proportion of zero-emission vehicles, rising to 80% in 2030.
The prolonged used of dirtier cars will bring in slightly more fuel duty to the government – an average £700m extra a year on the new forecast.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.12pm GMT 
Hunt today pledged £520m for “transformational manufacturing investments” in the life sciences sector from 2025-26.
Two research & development tax relief schemes will be merged next April to simplify the system, and within this the rate at which lossmaking companies get taxed will be reduced from 25% to 19%.
This was welcomed by businesses, although subcontractors hiring R&D staff could lose out.  James Sheppard, UK & Ireland managing director at the lab and office provider Kadans Science Partner, said:
“We welcome the announcement from the chancellor that the government plans to progress its proposed Mansion House Reforms to pension funds announced earlier this year hoping to unlock £25bn for innovative companies in the UK by 2030. The historic lack of investment in life sciences infrastructure in the UK has meant that the industry hasn’t been sufficiently supported to reach its growth potential.
These new measures, including further tax reform for loss making SMEs, are a welcome step-change if the UK is to reach its goal of becoming a life sciences superpower.
block-time published-time 4.06pm GMT 
 IFS: this is not a recipe for good management of the public finances  
 Paul Johnson, the director of the IFS, has just issued his early analysis of the autumn statement. 
 Johnson starts by “getting a few things straight”:
The public finances haven’t meaningfully improved. The growth outlook has weakened. Inflation is expected to stay higher for longer.
Higher inflation pushes up tax receipts by more than it pushes up spending on debt interest or social security benefits; but rather than use the proceeds to ease the ongoing ‘fiscal drag’ effects of threshold freezes, or to compensate public services for higher costs, the chancellor opted to cut other taxes.
His immediate cut to national insurance will put more money into workers’ pockets when it comes in but won’t be enough to prevent this from being the biggest tax-raising parliament in modern times.
 Johnson then warns that announcing immediate and certain tax cuts in response to highly uncertain changes in assumptions about the UK’s medium-term economic prospects is “does not feel like a recipe for good management of the public finances”.
He says:
His [the chancellor’s] so called “headroom” against a rather loose fiscal target is minuscule and the OBR could easily take it away in the Spring Budget with some very small changes to forecasts. What will he do then?
Certainly, whoever is Chancellor after the next general election is going to have very little room for manoeuvre.
Having said all that, Johnson concludes, Hunt has chosen a “pretty sensible set of taxes to cut”.
Making full expensing permanent rather than temporary is welcome.
Cutting rates of national insurance is preferable to cutting rates of income tax and may help boost employment. But these tax cuts have been ‘paid for’, in effect, by letting fiscal drag become even more of a tax rise than previously expected and through a bigger squeeze on the real-terms value of public service budgets and an even bigger squeeze on public investment, which is frozen in cash terms.
There’s a material risk that those plans prove undeliverable and today’s tax cuts will not prove to be sustainable.”
enltrDespite some good news about growth this year, @OBR_uk  ’s forecast in the medium run is large downgrade on previous vintages. The economy is forecast to grow 0.6% less between 2024 and 2027 under the new forecast. Read IFS' #AutumnStatement  response: https://t.co/AQZSeqPFEA pic.twitter.com/JLhqK7BYK0
 — Institute for Fiscal Studies (@TheIFS) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.01pm GMT 
block-time published-time 3.54pm GMT 
 Home secretary described Stockton as ‘shithole’ during PMQs, MP claims  
The Labour MP Alex Cunningham has claimed that his constituency was described as a “shithole” by the home secretary, James Cleverly , during prime minister’s questions. Ben Quinn has the story.
 Related:  Home secretary described Stockton as ‘shithole’, MP claims
block-time published-time 3.49pm GMT 
 Lib Dems claim fiscal drag 'stealth tax' makes autumn statement a 'Hunt hoax'  
The Liberal Democrats have described the autumn statement as a “Hunt hoax”. In a statement, Ed Davey said the government was implementing a £200bn stealth tax raid and he said the amount people would gain from the national insurance cut announced today would not compensate for the extra tax they were paying because of allowances and thresholds being frozen. Davey said:
This autumn statement was a Hunt hoax. Buried in the small print is a massive stealth tax raid that will drag millions into paying a higher rate in the coming years.
The British people will rightly be furious at this deception, as they are forced to pay the price for Conservative chaos through years of unfair tax hikes.
It is high time that this Conservative government came clean about just how much money they are taking out of hard-working families’ pockets.
The Lib Dems says that, even after the national insurance cut announced today, someone earning £35,000 a year will still be paying an extra £400 in tax in 2024-25. And a higher rate taxpayer will still be paying an extra £1,200 a year, the Lib Dems says.
To justify calling it a £200bn stealth tax, the Lib Dems aren’t looking at the extra revenue raised annually (the standard methodology), but are instead adding together all the annual figures for stealth tax revenue in the chart published by the OBR. See 2.30pm. 
block-time published-time 3.48pm GMT 
 UK still facing largest fall in real living standards since records began in the 1950s  
 Living standards are still heading for the worst fall in at least seven decades, despite the cut to national insurance rates announced today, the Office for Budget Responsibility says. 
Living standards, as measured by real household disposable income (RHDI) per person, are forecast to be 3.5% lower in 2024-25 than their pre-pandemic level.
While this is half the peak-to-trough fall the fiscal watchdog expected in March, it still represents the largest reduction in real living standards since ONS records began in the 1950s.
The OBR explains:
RHDI per person recovers its pre-pandemic level in 2027-28, something not achieved in our March forecast, as resilient labour incomes begin to steadily outmatch slowing inflation.
We estimate that the reduction in the rate of NICs announced in the autumn statement will boost real household incomes by around 0.5% at the end of the forecast.
 Resolution Foundation’s Torsten Bell says Conservative MPs should be worried….
enltrThe chart I'd be most worried about as a Tory MP? The disaster of what's happened to household incomes: 3.5% fall between the last election and the coming one is the largest reduction in real living standards since ONS records began in the 1950s pic.twitter.com/9iJixcnVEJ
 — Torsten Bell (@TorstenBell) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.39pm GMT 
Q: How responsible was it of Jeremy Hunt to spend the windfall from higher inflation [which has lifted tax revenues]?
OBR chief Richard Hughes points out that the chancellor’s headroom to avoid breaching his fiscal rule [to have public sector net debt falling at the end of the forecast horizon] has risen to £13bn, from £6.5bn in March.
But, that’s partly because the target has now moved forward a year, to 2028-29.
Overall, Hughes says, the health of the public finances are broadly unchanged compared with March.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.27pm GMT 
Q: With the UK’s national debt nearly 100% of GDP, could it cope with another crisis such as the Covid-19 pandemic?
 OBR chief Richard Hughes tells today’s press conference that it all depends how interest rates reacted to a crisis – that would determine the government’s room for manoeuvre.
Hughes explains that when shocks hit everybody, rates on government borrowing tend to fall, which gives ministers some space to fund stimulus measures.
A worry would be a crisis that pushed up interest rates – such as one which resulted in higher energy costs, as that is inflationary.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.27pm GMT 
The autumn statement amounts to be biggest “giveaway” package in a budget or autumn statement since 2010, excluding the Covid-related one, the OBR says. This chart from the OBR report  illustrates this point.
    Size of fiscal packages since 2010 Photograph: OBR   
“Fiscal loosening” means, overall, the measure involves the Treasury “giving money away”, by cutting taxes or raising spending. “Fiscal tightening” is the opposite.
The March 2020 budget came before the Covid lockdown, but it included Covid-related stimulus measures worth £30bn.
block-time published-time 3.21pm GMT 
 The impact of the national insurance tax break will unfairly benefit men rather than women, Dr Mary-Ann Stephenson, director of the Women’s Budget Group (WBG) has warned. 
The WBG has calculated that single mothers will gain an extra £76 a year from the changes to NICs compared to £248 a year for lone fathers and £437 a year for households with two parents.
They argue that with the number of single parent households living destitution tripling since 2019 , single parents are the most likely to be hit by the benefit cap  and in need of local services like childcare and health services.
“We are heading into a winter that will be even tougher than last year,” said Stephenson, who added:
Cost of living payments are ending, but prices – in particular food, energy and housing costs – remain very high. Women are the shock absorbers of poverty and continue to bear the brunt of the cost of living crisis.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.14pm GMT 
Q: Is the chancellor getting as big a ‘bang for his buck’ as he’d like from his measures, asks our colleague Phillip Inman at the OBR’s press conference.
Professor David Miles, a member of the OBR’s budget responsibility committee, replies that increasing the underlying supply potential of the economy is very hard. You need to push very hard, just to move it a little bit.
Miles says the changes to capital allowances, and the national insurance rate cuts, add “a fraction of 1%”.
You could look at that and think it’s not a lot, Miles says, but it’s partly because the full impact of making full expensing permanent falls beyond the OBR’s forecast horizon.
Miles warns:
It’s actually very difficult for governments to – in a relatively short period like a few years – make a meaningful impact on growth.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.05pm GMT 
 Hunt's big tax cuts only possible because future government spending held down, explains OBR  
 Jeremy Hunt’s controversial decision not to announce any major departmental spending increases to reflect higher inflation has given him the firepower for today’s tax cuts, the Office for Budget Responsibility shows. 
The head of the OBR, Richard Hughes, has explained to reporters that Departmental Expenditure Limits (DELs) make up 40% of public spending.
They are set periodically, and the next review is not until after the general election.
This means that for the years beyond 2024-25, the Treasury has simply told the OBR that departmental spending will rise by £5bn per year.
That, Hughes explains, means that departmental real spending power has been eroded by £19bn compared with the March forecast.
enltrThis??is the scandal of today’s budget. The whole thing is premised on impossible cuts to the services we all rely on https://t.co/7lzXpOpNBH
 — Hannah Peaker (@hannahpeaker1) November 22, 2023
Speaking at a press conference now, Hughes says:
The eagle-eyed amongst you will recognise that is roughly equal to the amount the chancellor spent on the two big tax cuts in this fiscal event.
Had he sought to preserve the real spending power of public services, in the face of higher inflation over the next five years, that would have left him with relatively little to spend on other measures.
enltrKey nugget from OBR: the windfall which the Chancellor just spent on tax cuts “is mainly a reflection of a £19.1bn erosion in the real value of departmental spending.” That’s the “significant and growing risk to our forecast” - ticking time bomb for the next parliament. pic.twitter.com/JmgrEjkjyE
 — Stephanie Flanders (@MyStephanomics) November 22, 2023
As we flagged in the previous post , economists say the Treasury’s spending assumption is simply unrealistic.
Hughes says that the pressures on departmental spending are rising, due to rising inflation and policy changes such as the NHS workforce plan, or the aim to raise defence spending as a share of GDP. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.02pm GMT 
 Experts claim Hunt's plan for £19bn real terms cut in proposed government spending 'implausible'  
The OBR says that Jeremy Hunt’s plans for the future assume that, in real terms, annual govenrment spending by 2027-28 will be £19.1bn lower than it was assumed at the time of the March budget. Economists say this is not realistic.
The Treasury has not said exactly how much each department will be getting that far ahead. But the OBR says that, given some departmental spending is in effect protected, in unprotected departments day-to-day spending will fall by 2.3% in real terms in 2025-26. If defence spending goes up to 2.5% of GDP, as the government has promised, and if aid spending returns to 0.7% of national income, unprotected spending would have to fall by 4.1%, the OBR says.
This chart from the OBR report  illustrates these numbers.
    Breakdown of planned future government day to day spending Photograph: OBR   
The OBR says, diplomatically, that this would “present challenges”. It says:
Delivering a 2.3% a year real terms fall in day-to-day spending would present challenges. Performance indicators for public services continue to show signs of strain, for example the backlog in crown courts reached a record high of 65,000 in August 2023 and eleven ‘section 114s’ notices have been issued by local authorities since 2018, compared to two in the preceding 18 years. The Institute for Government’s recent report found that performance in eight out of nine major public services has declined since 2010, with schools the exception. Longer-term pressures on public spending, such as from climate change and an ageing population, are also building.
 Ian Mulheirn, an economist at the Resolution Foundation thinktank, is a lot blunter. He says these spending plans are implausible.
OBR draws out completely implausible implications -real terms cuts of 2.3-4.1%/yr after 2025 for unprotected departments ?? What’s the plan here? Abolish the criminal justice system and public transport maybe? This should be the debate, not ‘have they really cut taxes?’
enltrOBR draws out completely implausible implications -real terms cuts of 2.3-4.1%/yr after 2025 for unprotected departments ?? What's the plan here? Abolish the criminal justice system and public transport maybe? This should be the debate, not 'have they really cut taxes?' https://t.co/wT5nFANUbv pic.twitter.com/BkMVyo1D2Z
 — Ian Mulheirn (@ianmulheirn) November 22, 2023
Central story of the #Autumnstatement  is that a (nominal) £21bn/yr tax cut has been funded from (real) £19bn/yr cut in public services This isn’t sustainable and whoever wins the election will have to raise those taxes again – and then some – just to keep the wheels on
enltrCentral story of the #Autumnstatement  is that a (nominal) £21bn/yr tax cut has been funded from (real) £19bn/yr cut in public services This isn't sustainable and whoever wins the election will have to raise those taxes again - and then some - just to keep the wheels on
— Ian Mulheirn (@ianmulheirn) November 22, 2023
This is from Daniel Tomlinson from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation thinktank.
The government has cut spending plans by £19bn a year compared to the previous forecast, even as pressures on public spending mount. Not a serious way to run a budget.
enltrThe government has cut spending plans by £19bn a year compared to the previous forecast, even as pressures on public spending mount. Not a serious way to run a budget. pic.twitter.com/QVZLMMlZpS
 — Daniel Tomlinson (@dan_tomlinson_) November 22, 2023
And this is from Chris Giles from the Financial Times.
The key point of the autumn statement from @OBR_UK Public finances better because public spending is not rising with higher inflation
enltrThe key point of the autumn statement from @OBR_UK Public finances better becasue public spending is not rising with higher inflation pic.twitter.com/7u9kvi3vgx
 — Chris Giles (@ChrisGiles_) November 22, 2023
These proposed spending figures suggest Hunt doesn’t expect his party to be winning the next election. They also support the argument made by Rafael Behr in his column today  about Hunt setting a trap for Labour.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.37pm GMT 
 OBR: inflation to remain higher for longer  
 The OBR’s verdict on inflation is blunt: it expects inflation to remain higher for longer. 
It now takes until the second quarter of 2025 for the CPI inflation rate to return to the 2% target, more than a year later than forecast in March. 
Inflation is also more domestically fuelled, the OBR says. Although gas prices have fallen faster than expected, stronger nominal wage growth means people have more money to spend.
From a peak of 10.7% in the last quarter of last year, CPI inflation is now expected to fall to 4.8% in the final quarter of 2023.
    A chart showing the latest inflation forecasts Photograph: OBR   
This higher inflation means that the financial markets expect interest rates to be around 1 percentage point higher than they did in March.
The OBR says:
Bank rate reached a 15-year high of 5.25% in August 2023, around 100 basis points above our previous forecast. And markets now expect bank rate to settle at 4% by the end of the forecast, rather than fall to 3% as we assumed in March.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.30pm GMT 
 Frozen tax allowances will lead to almost 4m more people paying tax by 2028-29, OBR says  
The OBR report contains fresh figures on the impact of “fiscal drag”. It is well known that the government’s decision to freeze tax allowances and thresholds for six years means that large numbers of people are being brought into higher tax brackets, or into paying tax in the first place, but the latest figures are still quite striking.
The OBR says:
Between 2022-23 and 2028-29, this set of threshold freezes means nearly 4 million additional individuals will be expected to pay income tax, 3 million more will have moved to the higher rate, and 400,000 more onto the additional rate. This represents an increase in the number of taxpayers in each band of income tax – 11% for the basic rate band, 68% for the higher rate and 49% for the additional rate. Relative to our March forecast, this is a respective increase in 2027-28 of 830,000, 900,000, and 43,000.
The OBR also says that, by 2028-29, these policies will have raised an extra £44.6bn for the Treasury.
    Impact of fiscal drag Photograph: OBR    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.23pm GMT 
 Chancellor’s business rates measures are ‘smoke and mirrors’  
 Retailers and hospitality businesses were disappointed by the  chancellor’s plans to increase business rates for larger businesses, which will add almost £1.7bn to bills next year according to analysts. 
There was relief that the rates discount of 75% for smaller hospitality, leisure and retail businesses operating in premises with a rateable value of less than £51,000 is to be extended by one year, benefiting about 1m businesses. A further 740,000 will continue to benefit from 100% small business rates relief.
However, around 220,000 ratepayers will see their bills rise in line with September’s CPI figure of 6.7%, according to analysts at Gerald Eve, costing them £1.66bn next year and £8bn over the next five years.
The British Retail Consortium trade body described the business rates decision as a “disappointing announcement”.
 Kate Nicholls, the head of UK Hospitality, which represents thousands of pubs, restaurants and cafes, said many small businesses operated from larger standard rated premises and so would not benefit from the relief.
enltrbusiness rates - hospitality rate relief extended for a further year at 75% and a freeze in small premises multiplier. Disappointing Standard multiplier will rise inflation - many small businesses operate from larger standard rated premises, particularly hospitality
— Kate Nicholls OBE (@UKHospKate) November 22, 2023
 Simon Green, head of business rates at  Gerald Eve  , said: 
“The Chancellor’s business rates measures are ‘smoke and mirrors’. They are designed to win him plaudits for protecting businesses from rates increases whilst still raking in an extra £8bn in rates revenue.
“Around 89% of all properties will indeed benefit from the freeze announced, but it is larger businesses – paying rates for some 220,000 properties – which pay over 75% of all rates next year, upon which this stealth tax will fall.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.20pm GMT 
 Britain’s biggest green energy investors have enjoyed a share price bounce  after the  chancellor’s  autumn  statement, which has promised to accelerate £90bn in business investment over the next  10 years by making it easier to move ahead with multi billion-pound projects. 
Shares in SSE, National Grid and the Copenhagen-listed Ørsted climbed as Jeremy Hunt set out plans to speed up planning consents, cut the wait for new grid connections and offer some of the most generous tax breaks of any developed economy for investors.
The companies, which are planning to make multibillion-pound investments in the UK’s green energy transition, are expected to benefit from the Treasury’s promise to make “full expensing” permanent in what Hunt described as “the largest business tax cut in modern British history”.
Shares in National Grid and SSE, which plans to invest £40bn in clean energy over the next 10 years, climbed to four-month highs after Hunt set out his plans. SSE’s share price climbed by almost 1% to 1,806p a share while National Grid’s share price climbed by nearly 0.5% to 1,043p a share.
For Denmark’s Ørsted the tax breaks could tip the balance in its decision on whether to move ahead with its £8bn plan to build the world’s biggest offshore windfarm off the Yorkshire coast.
Its plan to develop the Hornsea 3 project was plunged into doubt due to a recent surge in offshore wind supply chain costs which led the company to cancel two major offshore wind projects off the US coast.  Ørsted is expected to make a final decision on the project before the end of the year.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.14pm GMT 
 Unemployment is expected to rise by more than forecast at the March budget. 
The Office for Budget Responsibility’s central forecast is that unemployment rises to 1.6 million people (4.6% of the labour force) and peaks in the second quarter of 2025.
That peak is 85,000 higher than expected in March – when it was expected to be 4.4% –and comes a year later than expected.
The OBR predicts that demand for labour will weaken, due to slower growth and the rise in interest rates.
Unemployment then falls back to its assumed structural rate of 4.1% by the forecast horizon, as the bank rate falls and the spare capacity in the economy is taken up, the OBR adds.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.14pm GMT 
You can read all the Treasury autumn statement documents on its website here.
Here is the main autumn statement green book.  The key table, the scorecard showing how much all the measures will raise or cost the Treasury in the years going ahead, starts on page 81.
And here is the Office for Budget Responsibility’s assessment – its economic and fiscal outlook report.
block-time published-time 2.08pm GMT 
 Disappointing economic news: the OBR has revised down its estimate of the medium-term potential growth rate of the economy to 1.6%, from 1.8% at the March budget. 
The revision is largely driven by a weaker forecast for the average hours an employee will work, which is now forecast to fall rather than remain static.
The OBR says:
This largely reflects our reassessment of the effect of demographic shifts in the composition of the working population toward younger and older age groups who work shorter hours on average.
The TUC say it’s a ‘damning judgement’ on the autumn statement:
enltrOBR's damning judgement on Chancellor's "budget for growth": "we have revised DOWN our estimate of the medium-term potential GROWTH rate of the economy to 1.6 per cent, from 1.8 per cent in March". (our emphasis)
— TUC Economics and Social Affairs (@TUCeconomics) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 2.00pm GMT 
 Small print alert: UK house prices to fall in 2024  
 UK house prices are forecast to fall by 4.7% next year, the  Office for Budget Responsibility’s new economic and fiscal outlook shows. 
That follows an estimated 0.9% rise this year, with the OBR lifting its forecast for mortgage rates over the next few years.
The OBR says:
This would be consistent with the price of the average UK home reaching a low of around £266,000 at its trough in the final quarter of 2024.
All in all, from their high in the fourth quarter of 2022 to their low in the final quarter of 2024, nominal house prices are expected to decline by 7.6%.
As this chart shows, that’s a smaller fall than forecast in March.
The OBR then expects a slow recovery in house prices, but it will take until the second half of 2027 for them to reach their 2022 peak, they estimate.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.49pm GMT 
 Reeves says things might look fine to Sunak 10,000ft up in his helicopter. But on the ground people know the reality is different, she says.
She says 1.6 million families will have to remortage this year.
People are having to pay on average more than £200 a month, she says.
And in Hunt’s constituency the average increase will be £420 a month, she says.
Working people do not have that sort of money hanging around, she says.
Tory economic recklessness is not a thing of the past, she says. People are still paying the price.
She says the Tories voted against an amendment to the king’s speech last week which would have prevented a repeat of the mini-budget horror show (by banning fiscal announcements like that without an OBR assessment). They have not learned their lessons, she says.
At the election, the question will be simple. Do people feel better off? Do services work better? Does anything work better? Working people are worse off under the Tories.
Taxes are up, debt is up – and their time is up too, she says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.05am GMT
block-time published-time 1.48pm GMT 
 Sir Nicholas Macpherson,  the former top civil servant at the Treasury, has posted that chancellor Hunt is funding his national insurance cut by raising more money through income tax – in a reversal of decades of fiscal policy.
enltrCredit to Mr Hunt though for funding national insurance cut by raising income tax. Turns practice of last 40 years on its head. Benefits workers and young at expense of rentiers, capitalists and pensioners. https://t.co/i2fP2yihOF
 — Nick Macpherson (@nickmacpherson2) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 1.45pm GMT 
 UK tax burden still heading to postwar high  
 For all the talk of tax cutting from Jeremy Hunt, the UK’s tax burden is still forecast to increase to a post war high! 
The Office for Budget Responsibility says that the tax changes in this autumn statement reduce the tax burden by 0.7% of GDP.
However, that burden rises in every year to a postwar high of 37.7% of GDP by 2028-29.
enltrWhen is a tax cut not a tax cut? This chart from OBR shows tax as a per cent of GDP still peaks at same level as projected in March - a record 37.7% of GDP. OBR: "the tax burden is forecast to reach a post-war high of 37.7 per cent of GDP in 2028-29" pic.twitter.com/zj9aabobYO
 — Paul Johnson (@PJTheEconomist) November 22, 2023
The OBR says that income tax increases explain most of the increase in this forecast, rising from 10.2% of GDP this year, to 11.3% in 2028-29.
That is driven by the freezing of income tax thresholds – which means fiscal drag will put more people into higher bands as their nominal wages increase.
 Related:  UK income tax: how fiscal drag leads to people falling into higher rates
The OBR says:
By 2028-29, frozen thresholds result in nearly 4 million additional workers paying income tax, 3 million more moved to the higher rate, and 400,000 more paying the additional rate.
VAT and corporation tax also rise from 6.4% and 3.4% of GDP this year to 6.5% and 3.6% of GDP in 2028-29.
The OBR says this is because “consumption shifts back towards standard VAT-rated goods and companies face the full-year effects of the rise in the main corporation tax rate”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.43pm GMT 
 Reeves welcomes the extra money for tackling antisemitism.
She says Hunt calls this an autumn statement for growth. But Labour has led the way on this, she says. She says Hunt’s plan is just a “cover version” of hers.
She says Labour would go further on pension fund reform.
And she says Hunt is copying plans already announced by Labour on planning reform.
She also says Labour said full expensing should be made permanent.
block-time published-time 1.39pm GMT 
 Reeves says some NHS trusts are still using fax machines. The Tories have failed to invest in the health service, she says.
block-time published-time 1.38pm GMT 
 Reeves says, to grow the economy, more people need to be in work.
She says Labour believes that, if people can work, they should work.
It has called for reform of the work capability assessment, she says.
Too many people are out of work because of long-term health isssues, she says.
block-time published-time 1.36pm GMT 
 OBR: Chancellor has spent almost all his windfall  
 As Jeremy Hunt sits down, the Office for Budget Responsibility releases its assessment of the autumn statement. 
And the topline is that chancellor Hunt has received a windfall of £27bn – and spent almost all of it.
That windfall comes because borrowing so far this financial year has been lower than expected, partly because high inflation has lifted tax receipts. But departmental spending budgets are not inflation-linked, so did not automatically rise in response.
The OBR says:
The economy has proved more resilient to the shocks of the pandemic and energy crisis than we anticipated. But inflation has also been more persistent and interest rates higher than in March.
Higher inflation boosts tax revenues but also welfare benefits while higher interest rates push up debt servicing. But because departmental spending is left largely unchanged, this delivers a net fiscal windfall of £27 billion.
The Chancellor spends virtually all of this on a 2p cut in NICs, permanent tax relief for business investment, and further welfare reforms, leaving debt falling by a narrow margin in five years.
block-time published-time 1.35pm GMT 
 Reeves says 177 economies are expected to grow more quickly than the UK over the next few years.
And next year the UK is forecast to have the slowest growth in the G7.
The UK is more world-following than world-beating.
Under Labour, the economy grew by 2% on average every year, she says. Under the Tories growth has been 1.5%, she says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.36pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.33pm GMT 
 Labour's Rachel Reeves says NI cut will 'not remotely' compensate for tax increases already imposed by Tories  
 Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, is speaking now.
She says the government’s plans are not working and people are “still worse off”.
She says she can remember when Rishi Sunak was arguing for an increase in national insurance. Labour opposed that plan then. Now Sunak is implementing a cut – which means he is arguing with himself, she says.
She says the public knows that today’s announcements are about a party wanting to hold on to power.
Ahead of today, the government had implemented tax increases equivalent to a 10% increase in national insurance.
So today’s 2% cut will “not remotely” compensate for those, she says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.30pm GMT 
Hunt says his decision to lower the main national insurance rate from 12% to 10%  will save a worker on the average salary of £35,000 over £450 per year.
The average nurse will save £520, the chancellor says, while a typical police officer would save £630.
enltrHunt's final measure a personal tax cut. Employee National Insurance cut by 2% to 10%, affecting 27m people from January. Says it will save a nurse £500 a year. (Barely 18 months since Rishi Sunak increased NI to 13.25% to fund the NHS)
— Paul Kelso (@pkelso) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 1.27pm GMT 
 Hunt announces 2 percentage point cut to national insurance, coming into effect from January, worth £450 for average worker  
 Hunt turns to tax cuts.
He says he promised to only cut taxes when that was affordable, and possible without putting up inflation.
Today the OBR says that is possible, he says.
High taxes disencourage work, he adds, and taking into account national insurance, people pay a 32% marginal tax rate.
National insurance will be cut, he announces.
He is going to cut the main rate for employee national insurance from 12% to 10%. He says 27 million people will benefit.
He says that is worth £450 for someone on average earnings.
Hunt says normally this could come in at the start of the tax year, in April. But instead he will introduce emergency legislation to bring this in from 6 January.
He says the OBR says this will lead to the workforce going up by 94,000.
The Treasury says:
From January employee national insurance contributions will drop from 12% to 10%.
That’s a £450 tax cut for the average worker earning £35,400.
Helping people keep more of the money they earn & making work pay.
Part of our plan to grow the economy.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.23pm GMT 
 Hunt confirms the increases to the national living wage announced yesterday.
 Related:  National living wage to rise by almost 10% to £11.44 an hour
Hunt claims Labour wanted to address poverty by tinkering with tax credits. But his party believes in getting people into work, he says.
block-time published-time 1.22pm GMT 
 Hunt says new welfare support and sanction measures will get 200,000 more people into workforce  
 Hunt says the government needs to back workers as well as businesses.
He says he wants to increase incentives to work.
He praises Mel Stride, the work and pensions secretary. He says Stride’s reforms build on universal credit. Those measures were opposed by Labour, he says.
He says 30 hours of free childcare for one- and two-year-olds was announced in the spring budget.
Today he is announcing measure for the long-term unemployed, and people who do not work due to sickness or disability.
Under the back-to-work plan, the sick note system will be changed, to assume that people can work. The work capability assessment will be changed. And more support will be offered of people going into work.
The government will ask for something in return, he says. If after 18 months of help, there will be mandatory work experience. And if people do not participate, the government will close the case and stop their benefits.
He says the OBR thinks this will get another 200,000 people into the workforce.
Labour wants to expand the workforce by immigration, he claims. He says his party wants to use workers from Britain.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.16pm GMT 
 Hunt says these measure will increase business investment by £20bn a year – almost 1% of GDP.
block-time published-time 1.15pm GMT 
 Hunt announces £11bn 'full expensing' tax cut for businesses  
 Hunt is now on full expensing. (See 10.36am. )
This will cost £11bn a year, he says.
But today it is affordable. Full expensing will be made permanent. It is “the largest business tax cut in modern British history”.
The Treasury says:
NEWS: Due to the success of full expensing we are making it permanent. This means that companies that invest in the UK will reduce their tax by up to 25p for every £1 they spend on plant and machinery.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.13pm GMT 
 Shares in NatWest have dropped, after Hunt said he would explore options to sell some of the government’s stake in the bank through a “ retail share offer” . 
The government is currently the largest shareholder in NatWest, holding 39.39% of its shares.
That stake dates back to the bailout of Royal Bank of Scotland  (which rebranded as NatWest) after the 2008 financial crisis.
NatWest’s shares are down 1% at 205p, as City traders anticipate some of the government’s stake hitting the market.
Hunt joked that it was “time to get Sid investing again”, a reference to the 1980s campaign  to persuade the public to take part in the privatisation of British Gas, as the Thatcher government flogged off much of the UK’s “family silver”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.13pm GMT 
 Hunt announces tax cuts for self-employed worth £350 per year  
 Hunt says he is abolishing class 2 national insurance, which is paid by the self-employed. This will save them £192 per year.
Nearly 2 million self-employed people will benefit, he says.
And he says the self-employed also pay class 4 national insurance at 9%. That will go down to 8%.
Taken together, these measures will save self-employed workers £350.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.11pm GMT 
 Hunt announces further business rates discount for hospitality, retail and leisure, worth £4.3bn  
 Hunt turns to small businesses. He says he ran one once. Every big business started as a small one, he says.
He says SMEs want bills paid on time. The government will ensure firms bidding for government contracts have to pay their bills on time – with 55 days at first, and then within 30 days.
He says the 75% business rates discount for hospitality, retail and leisure is being extended for another year, at a cost of £4.3bn.
block-time published-time 1.08pm GMT 
 Hunt says £1bn of extra levelling up money was announced on Monday.
And there is £80m for projects in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, he says.
block-time published-time 1.06pm GMT 
 Hunt says he announced plans for 12 investment zones – mini Canary Wharfs – in the spring.
He says tax reliefs for freeports and investment zones are being extended from five years to 10 years.
And he says he is announcing three more investment zones today in the West Midlands, the east Midlands and Greater Manchester.
These should bring in private investment of £3bn, and 65,000 jobs.
And there will be a new investment zone in Wrexham and Flintshire, he says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.10pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.06pm GMT 
 UK growth forecasts downgraded for 2024, 2025 and 2026  
 The new GDP forecasts show that UK growth is stronger than expected this year, but weaker than previously expected in 2024, 2025 and 2026. 
Here are the new forecasts, compared to the OBR’s forecasts at the March budget:
2023: growth of 0.6%, up from a GDP fall of 0.2% forecast in March2024: growth of 0.7%, down from 1.8% growth forecast in March2025: growth of 1.4%, down from 2.5% growth forecast in March2026: growth of 1.9%: down from 2.1% growth forecast in March2027: growth of 2%, up from 1.9% growth forecast in March2028: growth of 1.7%
enltrHere are the OBR's GDP growth forecasts: an upgrade to 2023 (albeit to still-weak levels) offset by downgrades to growth further ahead #AutumnStatement pic.twitter.com/dM9LPMkF8g
 — Alpesh Paleja (@AlpeshPaleja) November 22, 2023
Although downgraded, these forecasts are still more optimistic than the Bank of England, though; it fears there is a 50-50 chance of a recession by the middle of next year. 
enltrInterestingly the OBR growth forecast is considerably more optimistic than that of the @bankofengland.  Will be interesting to see how much of that is down to the measures we’re about to hear about. Even so… worse than last time around
— Ed Conway (@EdConwaySky) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.20pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.04pm GMT 
 Hunt says he is publishing plans to make available £4.5bn over five years to attract investment into strategic manufacturing sectors.
This will include money for electric cars and life sciences.
He says these investments will ensure the UK remains competitive in sectors where it already leads, and innovative in areas where it does not.
block-time published-time 1.03pm GMT 
 Hunt says the Barbie movie was filmed in Watford. He says he wants to ensure more films are made in the UK. The Treasury says on X.
Our creative sector is worth £126bn a year to the economy. 
To boost global competitiveness, we will work with the industry to provide additional tax relief for visual effects expenditure - helping to attract more investment into the UK.
He announces changes to R&D tax relief.
block-time published-time 1.01pm GMT 
 Hunt says, based on the success of supercomputing centres in Edinburgh and Bristol, he will invest in more of these to make the UK an AI powerhouse.
block-time published-time 1.01pm GMT 
 Hunt says he will explore the options for selling off the government’s remaining shares in NatWest.
block-time published-time 1.00pm GMT 
 Hunt announces changes to the rules for pension funds.
And he says he will give workers the right to require new employers to pay pension money into an existing pension pot.
block-time published-time 12.59pm GMT 
 Hunt says the government is accepting all the recommendations in Lord Harrington’s report into foreign direct investment
block-time published-time 12.58pm GMT 
 Hunt says planning laws to be changed to make it easier to turn home into two flats  
 Hunt says it takes too long to improve infrastructure projects.
From next year, councils will be able to recover the full costs of planning applications – provided they meet prompt deadlines.
He says Starmer said he wanted to be a builder, not a blocker. But Labour blocked reform of nutrient neutrality (river pollution) rules, which, Hunt claims, will stop 100,000 extra homes being built.
He says plans are being announced to bust the planning backlog. 
And the government will consult on a law to allow any house to be converted into two flats, provided the exterior is respected.
block-time published-time 12.57pm GMT 
 Here are the new estimates for the UK’s budget deficit, which Hunt rattled off briskly. 
As you can see, borrowing is lower for most years than expected back at the March budget, and is hitting the second fiscal rule (that debt is below 3% of the economy) most years.
2023-24: 4.5% of GDP, lower than the 5.1% of GDP ( £131.6bn) forecast in March2024-25: 3% of GDP, lower than the 3.2% of GDP (£85.4bn) forecast in March2025-26: 2.7% of GDP, lower than the 2.8% of GDP (£76.7bn) forecast in March2026-27: 2.3% of GDP, higher than the 2.2% of GDP (£63.5bn) forecast in March2027-28: 1.6% of GDP, lower than the 1.7% of GDP (£49.3bn) forecast in March2027-28: 1.1% of GDP
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.55pm GMT 
 Hunt turns to skills.
The government has reformed schools, he says. 
But 9 million adults still have low literacy or numeracy skills.
That is why the government has announced plans to reform A-levels, he says, introducing the Advanced British Standard.
block-time published-time 12.54pm GMT 
 Hunt says the UK has grown faster than many European economies since 2010.
Last year the OBR forecast a recession this year.
But the economy has grown instead, he says. It is 1.8% larger than it was pre-pandemic.
He reads out the growth forecasts.
To make those numbers higher, higher productivity is needed, he says.
He claims the 110 measures being announced today will boost business investment by £20bn a year.
block-time published-time 12.52pm GMT 
 Hunt says he expects to raise an extra £5bn over the forecast period by making sure everyone pays the tax they owe.
block-time published-time 12.52pm GMT 
 Hunt says he wants a more productive state. He wants public sector productivity to rise by at least 0.5% per year.
Over time the growth in public spending will be lower than the growth in the economy, he says.
block-time published-time 12.50pm GMT 
 Hunt announces new money for veterans. This is from the Treasury’s tweet.
Members of the armed forces put their lives on the line to safeguard British freedoms every day.
This is why we’re confirming an additional £10m to support veterans – helping to fund vital mental health services for veterans in their communities across the United Kingdom.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.49pm GMT 
 Hunt rattles through the debt figures.
He says debt will be falling, not just at the end of the forecast period, as the target says, but in most years too.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.48pm GMT 
 Hunt turns to borrowing, and says Labour will increase it by £28bn a year.
But borrowing is just a deferred tax on future generations, as Nigel Lawson says, he says.
He says Keir Starmer disagrees. He and Starmer have something in common, he says. They both wanted to make a Jeremy prime minister, he says.
block-time published-time 12.47pm GMT 
 Hunt says debt has been due to rise to almost 100% of GDP.
But now it is predicted to be 94% of GDP by the end of the forecast.
He reads out the precise figures.
The UK will continue to have the second lowest debt in the G7, he says.
block-time published-time 12.46pm GMT 
 Hunt: Inflation to hit 2% target in 2025  
 Hunt says that inflation is forecast to drop to 2.8% by the end of 2024, down from 4.6% recorded in October. 
And it will drop to 2% (the Bank of England’s inflation target) in 2025, Hunt says.
enltrJeremy Hunt says @OBR_UK  forecast that headline inflation will fall to 2.8% by end of 2024, before falling to the 2% target in 2025. (We get OBR in its own words shortly)
— Paul Kelso (@pkelso) November 22, 2023
But back in March, the Office for Budget Responsibility had estimated that inflation would fall to just 0.9% in 2024. 
So this suggests inflation is more persistent than the OBR had expected back in the spring.
enltrUK Chancellor Hunt: OBR Forecast UK Headline Inflation At 2.8% For 2024 (March Forecast 0.9%), Inflation Will Fall To 2% Target In 2025 - We Will Back BoE To Do Whatever It Takes To Get Inflation Back To Target
— LiveSquawk (@LiveSquawk) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.45pm GMT 
 Hunt says the triple lock has been a lifeline for pensioners.
There have been reports that it might be uprated by a lower amount, ignoring the impact of bonuses on wage figures.
But from April next year the state pension will go up by 8.5% – which will be worth up to £900 a year, he says.
block-time published-time 12.44pm GMT 
Hunt confirms he has frozen all alcohol duty until 1 August next year.
block-time published-time 12.44pm GMT 
 Hunt confirms housing allowance being increased  
 Hunt says he is increasing the housing allowance.
This will give 1.6 million people an extra £800 next year, he says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.43pm GMT 
 Hunt says benefits will be uprated next year by 6.7%  
 Hunt says benefits will be increased by 6.7%, in line with September’s inflation figure.
He says he chose not to use the lower October figure, as some people speculated he might.
block-time published-time 12.41pm GMT 
 Hunt is now on the OBR forecasts.
He says the government is delivering on halving inflation, growing the economy and reducing debt.
He says the shadow chancellor did not mention inflation in her conference speech. His came first. So all she had to do was a bit of copy and pasting, he jokes.
block-time published-time 12.40pm GMT 
 Hunt expresses his horror at the murderous attack on Israelis on 7 October, and the subsequent loss of life on both sides.
He says he is giving up to £7m over the next three years to organisations like the Community Security Trust to tackle antisemitism.
block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT 
 Hunt says statement containes 110 measures to promote growth  
 Hunt says there are 110 growth measures in the autumn statement.
He will not go through them all, he says.
He says the OBR says these measure will raise investment, increase employment and raise GDP.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.38pm GMT 
 Jeremy Hunt claims economy 'back on track' as he starts autumn statement  
 Jeremy Hunt is making his statement now.
He starts by saying he comes with good news – it is his wife’s birthday, and she is looking younger every year.
He is turning to the statement, he says.
The government has taken difficult decision to put the economy “back on track”.
The economy has grown, and real incomes are working, he says.
He says others proposed a more short-term approach. But the government has not given the public sector unaffordable pay rises, it has not banned new oil exploration, and it has not promised £28bn extra annual borrowing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.35pm GMT 
Jeremy Hunt is about to start his autumn statement.
This, from ITV’s Robert Peston, illustrates the challenge he faces.
enltr??NEW On the week of the Autumn Statement, we asked 2000 GB adults how they feel about the UK economy in a word?? TOP RESPONSES: ??WORRIED ??TERRIBLE ??BAD ?? @RedfieldWilton  x #Peston  Word Clouds ?? @AnushkaAsthana Tonight ?? ??LIVE 9PM @itvpeston ??1045PM @ITV pic.twitter.com/4G5XlAqiNi
 — Peston (@itvpeston) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 12.33pm GMT 
 Daniel Zeichner (Lab) says people are cringing from Elon Musk’s latest outburst. What did the PM think he would learn from someone who took over a once-successful organisation and put it into a death spiral?
 Sunak says it is surprising to see an MP for Cambridge disparaging technology. He defends the AI summit he organised.
block-time published-time 12.30pm GMT 
 Sunak claims government did take advice from scientists on eat out to help out scheme  
 Gareth Thomas (Lab) asks if Sunak was telling the truth when he told the Covid inquiry that he had taken advice from scientists about the eat out to help out scheme – when Sir Patrick Vallance told the inquiry that this was not the case.
 Sunak says he will be giving evidence himself. But he claims the government did take advice on this from scientific advisers.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.26pm GMT 
 Andrew Western (Lab) says the government does not have a functioning asylum system. Will the PM disapply human rights laws to implement the Rwanda policy?
 Sunak says small boat arrivals are down 33% this year.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.06am GMT
block-time published-time 12.25pm GMT 
 Sunak claims 1.7 million fewer people are living in poverty.
(He seems to be referring to absolute poverty, not relative poverty – which makes this a misleading claim.)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT 
 Kevin Foster (Con) asks what the govenrment is doing about homelessness.
 Sunak says the government is investing £2bn in this area.
block-time published-time 12.22pm GMT 
 Liam Fox, the former Tory international trade secretary, says peace requires freedom from fear and terror. Does the PM agree that only when all the people in the Middle East have these can we talk about peace in the region?
 Sunak does agree.
block-time published-time 12.21pm GMT 
 Liz Saville Roberts, the Plaid Cymru leader at Westminster, expresses her condolences to the families of the four young men killed in the accident in Wales.
Will the government do something about unfair standing charges on energy bills?
 Sunak says the government has already offered people help with energy bills.
block-time published-time 12.18pm GMT 
 Stephen Flynn, the SNP’s leader at Westminster, asks what will happen after the pause in fighting in Gaza is over. He suggests MPs should back a permanent ceasefire.
 Sunak says the pause is a crucial first step. The government wants to see hostages released, he says. He thanks Qatar for its interventions.
 Flynn says it is not a pause in the killing of children that is needed, but an end to their killing. Sunak should push for a permanent ceasefire, he says. And if he won’t, will he recognise the state of Palestine.
 Sunak say the agreement shows it was not right to push for a unilateral ceasefire. That would have emboldened Hamas, he says. And he says the government supports a process leading to a two-state solution. And it wants the Palestinians to be strengthened. The government will recognise the state of Palestine “when it best serves the interests of peace”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.20pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.14pm GMT 
 Starmer says Sunak is trying to blame the opposition for his own failures. He quotes the mum he spoke to this morning whose son is waiting for treatment. The suicide rate for 15 to 19-year-olds has doubled since 2010, he says. Politics can turn this around. Scrapping tax loopholes could fund thousands more staff, he says. He says that would give people their lives back, and enable people to go back to work. That’s Labour’s plan. Will Sunak back it?
 Sunak says his is the first government to publish a long-term NHS workforce plan. He says Labour’s record was a “disastrous failure of workforce planning”. That was what the Labour-chaired health committee said, he says.
block-time published-time 12.14pm GMT 
Starmer says that, on Sunak’s watch, 2.5 million people are now too sick to work, “with the majority also suffering from mental health issues”.
Can the PM tell us how many people are now waiting for mental health treatment, Starmer asks.
Sunak says “record funds” have been invested in services. But, he adds, NHS strikes have led to thousands of cancelled appointments.
In response to Sunak’s next claim that waiting lists have come down in England, Starmer says we are “through the looking glass”.
Earlier this week, it was revealed that one in three people have missed work in the last year because of delays in accessing NHS  care.
 Related:  A third in UK missed work in 2022 due to delays accessing NHS care
The Observer, meanwhile, reported over the weekend that Sunak’s pledge to slash NHS waiting lists has effectively been downgraded amid an increase in the number of patients in England  waiting longer than 18 months for treatment.
 Related:  Sunak’s waiting list pledge ‘downgraded’ as NHS is told to control costs
block-time published-time 12.12pm GMT 
 Starmer says Sunak is taking no responsibility for the state of the NHS. Sunak would not accept those waits for his family, and nor should anyone else. He refers to a family waiting for treatment. How do they feel when they see the PM boasting that everything is fine?
 Sunak says the government is doing all it can to put money into the NHS. People deserve treatment. But it is galling to hear Starmer complain when his party does not condemn NHS strikes. And he won’t back the legislation to guarantee people get treatment.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.14pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.10pm GMT 
 Starmer says 1.2 million people are waiting for mental health treatment, including 200,000 children. Would Sunak accept that for family or friends?
 Sunak says he will expand patient choice. Labour’s policy on this has been a muddle, he says.
block-time published-time 12.09pm GMT 
 Starmer says more than double the entire population of Wales are on a waiting list in England. How many people are waiting for mental health treatment?
 Sunak says the union action that Labour fails to condemn has led to several hundred thousand cancelled appointments, making waiting lists worse.
In England 18-month waits have virtually been eliminated, but not in Wales, he says.
block-time published-time 12.08pm GMT 
Next, Rishi Sunak is pressed on comments yesterday by Laura Trott, chief secretary to the Treasury, who said people with mobility and mental health problems will be asked to work from home or lose benefits as part of “their duty”.
Sunak is asked how many job vacancies are currently available for people who can only work from home.
The PM replies that he doesn’t want to pre-empt anything that might appear in the chancellor’s upcoming autumn statement.
block-time published-time 12.07pm GMT 
 Starmer asks how workers can grow the economy if they have to wait a year for an operation.
 Sunak says he hopes the Welsh NHS is listening.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.07pm GMT 
 Keir Starmer welcomes the pause announced in the Middle East. He says he wants both sides to make progress to a full cessation of hostilities. He says in the past the international community has treated the two-state solution as a formality. That must change, he says.
He asks if Sunak forget to include the NHS in his latest five pledges.
 Rishi Sunak says he has put record funding into the NHS, and announced a workforce plan. On the pledges, he says he has halved inflation and he claims he has reduced debt.
UPDATE: This is from Bloomberg’s Alex Wickham. 
Sunak in the House claims his govt has “reduced debt” IFS to @Joe_Mayes  earlier this month: “Public sector debt is currently rising in cash terms, real terms, and, most importantly, as a percent of national income.
enltrSunak in the House claims his govt has "reduced debt" IFS to @Joe_Mayes  earlier this month: “Public sector debt is currently rising in cash terms, real terms, and, most importantly, as a percent of national income.” https://t.co/qoTEYgPzpT
 — Alex Wickham (@alexwickham) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.05pm GMT 
Rishi Sunak begins by offering his condolences to the families of the four teenagers who died in Wales.
He also welcomes the announcement of the “humanitarian pause” between Israel and Gaza.
The Labour leader, Sir Keir Starmer, in his opening statement, echoes both these sentiments.
On the four teenagers, he says he can “hardly imagine” the pain the families are experiencing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.03pm GMT 
Rishi Sunak is taking PMQs. Jeremy Hunt delivers the autumn statement when PMQs ends, soon after 12.30pm.
block-time published-time 11.41am GMT 
 Whitty says talking about behavioural fatigue was his biggest communications error during Covid  
Here are some more lines from what Prof Sir Chris Whitty has been telling the Covid inquiry this morning.
Whitty, chief medical officer for England and chief medical adviser for the UK, said that his biggest communications error was to talk about “behavioural fatigue”.  This was the theory that people would not be willing to keep complying with Covid restrictions for a long period of time. Before lockdown was announced, Whitty cited this in public as one reason why restrictions should not be imposed too early. Whitty told the inquiry:
This is one where my communications were really poor, frankly, and I said in my statement, this is probably my most prominent, at least in my view, communications error.
Whitty also said he was “told off” by his behavioural science colleagues for his phrasing and subsequently no longer spoke about the issue publicly.
He said “herd immunity” was never a policy goal at any point during the pandemic and the references to this by some officials in public were unhelpful.  He said:
I don’t think I ever saw anybody on the record, or anybody sensible, aiming for it [herd immunity] as a goal. I think some people tried to explain it as ‘this is what would happen over time’, I think frankly, unhelpfully …
If we were to go back in terms of our communication errors along the way – and there were a lot – this is firmly one of the ones where I think we didn’t help the public by having a debate that I think, quite rightly, upset and confused a lot of people.
He also said the term meant different things to different people.
Some people were meaning the herd immunity threshold – this is the point at which, for practical purposes, further waves are unlikely, which is very high.
The modellers were using it in the sense of a gradual increase – gradually increasing levels of immunity – meaning that the effective force of transmission gradually decreases but not to the point where there are no waves.
And I think there was, muddled up between those two completely different uses of the term.
He described the anti-lockdown Great Barrington Declaration  as “flawed at multiple levels”.  This is from Peter Walker on X.
Chris Whitty on the Great Barrington Declaration: “I thought it was flawed at multiple levels”. It was implicitly based on the idea of lifelong post-infection immunity, he says, which turned out to be incorrect.
enltrChris Whitty on the Great Barrington Declaration: "I thought it was flawed at multiple levels”. It was implicitly based on the idea of lifelong post-infection immunity, he says, which turned out to be incorrect.
— Peter Walker (@peterwalker99) November 22, 2023 Whitty said he and Sir Patrick Vallance, the government’s chief scientific adviser, were not consulted about the “eat out to help out” scheme – even though Boris Johnson, in his witness statement to the inquiry, claims that health officials were consulted.  Peter reports:
Inquiry hears that Boris Johnson’s witness statement says ‘eat out to help out’ was “properly discussed” with health/science officials. Whitty says he and Vallance were not consulted: “I think we should have been.”
block-time published-time 11.19am GMT 
Speculation about the autumn statement mostly focuses on the measures that Jeremy Hunt will announce, but budgets and autumn statements coincide with the Office for Budget Responsibility publishing its latest “economic and fiscal outlook” – a long report with forecasts that serve as a healthcheck on the state of the economy – and by the end of the day it is often the OBR that produces the most startling news lines.
The Financial Times says the OBR might have bad news for Rishi Sunak and Hunt on growth. In a preview  it says:
The measures [Hunt] announces are unlikely to forestall some unflattering growth forecasts from the Office for Budget Responsibility, the fiscal watchdog. While GDP growth is likely to be upgraded this year, the picture is less optimistic thereafter. In March the OBR said the UK economy would expand by 1.8% in 2024 and 2.5% in 2025. The Bank of England, by contrast, has predicted near-zero growth for both years.
The OBR’s 1.7% estimate of the UK’s sustainable growth rate, which is how fast the economy can grow without driving excess inflation, is also more optimistic than those of other forecasters. One of Hunt’s goals will be to convince the OBR to give him some economic credit for pro-business policies in its forecasts.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.33am GMT
block-time published-time 11.04am GMT 
 Keir Starmer has said that a pause in hostilities between Israel and Hamas must be used to tackle the “urgent and unacceptable humanitarian catastrophe” in Gaza.
Welcoming the deal , which is expected to involve the release of 50 hostages being held by Hamas and a number of women and teenagers from Israeli jails, the Labour leader said his party had been calling for “a substantial humanitarian pause”. He said:
There must be immediate access to aid, food, water, fuel and medicine to ensure hospitals function and lives are saved. Aid and fuel need to not just get in but be distributed widely and safely.
We must also use the space this pause creates to take more steps on a path towards a full cessation of hostilities rather than an escalation of violence.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.07am GMT
block-time published-time 10.51am GMT 
     Jeremy Hunt on Downing Street with the autumn statement document this morning. Photograph: Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.50am GMT
block-time published-time 10.49am GMT 
In his Guardian column today Rafael Behr argues the “headroom” being used by Jeremy Hunt to justify tax cuts (see 10.14am  ) is predicated on future spending cuts which the Conservatives, were they to win the next election, would never actually implement. He says it’s a trap for Labour. Here is an extract.
The real function of the projected spending squeeze is as a trap for Labour.  If the opposition rejects the Tory trajectory, it will be accused of planning a profligate spree with public money. And if it pledges adherence to impossible targets, it will enter government with its hands bound too tight to deliver prompt satisfaction to the people who voted for it.
Keir Starmer and Rachel Reeves  have so far operated a sensible policy of not walking into traps of this kind. That approach restored swing voters’ trust in Labour as stewards of the economy. But it tests the patience of an activist base that sees reversal of austerity as a moral imperative and can smell the incipient disappointment in promises of fiscal discipline.
The immediate challenge for Labour after the autumn statement is to avoid getting ensnared in a game of saying whether it would accept or reverse various specific measures. This is a balancing act that involves rejecting the premise of the question without sounding too evasive; refusing to dance to a Tory tune when the whole event is choreographed by the government.
And here is Rafael’s column in full.
 Related:  Hunt’s budget may be economic fantasy, but he’s set a political trap for Labour | Rafael Behr
block-time published-time 10.41am GMT 
And Jeremy Hunt will freeze alcohol duty in the autumn statement, the Sun has been told.
block-time published-time 10.36am GMT 
The Financial Times has splashed this morning on a report  saying Jeremy Hunt will make the “full expensing” tax relief system for businesses permanent in the autumn statement. It says:
The scheme, which was due to expire in 2026, allows a company to immediately deduct all of its spending on IT equipment, plant or machinery from taxable profits. Extending it was a crucial demand of business groups. 
Officials claimed Hunt’s permanent extension would give the UK one of the world’s most generous capital allowance regimes. One said the move would be the “biggest business tax cut in modern British history”. 
The independent Office for Budget Responsibility in March said the temporary version of the £9bn-a-year full expensing policy would boost business investment by as much as 3 per cent a year during its initial three-year period.
block-time published-time 10.33am GMT 
Here is Phillip Inman ’s guide to what to expect in the autumn statement.
 Related:  What to expect in the autumn statement 2023
block-time published-time 10.14am GMT 
 Harriet Baldwin, the Conservative MP who chairs the Commons Treasury committee, told GB News that she thinks Jeremy Hunt has “headroom” of around £20bn to use for tax cuts. She said:
If you look at the numbers that the Office for Budget Responsibility has been publishing each month, we think that there’s probably about £20bn of headroom and that’s because you and I, through those frozen tax levels and also businesses, we have actually ended up paying more tax this year than was planned in last year’s budget.
So I think that today gives the chancellor an opportunity to give some of that back to the hard-working businesses and people of this country so that we can grow the economy more rapidly next year.
For an alternative take on headroom, this is from the journalist James Ball. 
The “headroom” you’re hearing about – the one to allow for tax cuts – is almost entirely fictional. It’ll be predicated on real-terms cuts to services in the next parliamentary term that no-one thinks are deliverable, at all. It’s a stunt.
enltrThe “headroom” you’re hearing about – the one to allow for tax cuts – is almost entirely fictional. It’ll be predicated on real-terms cuts to services in the next parliamentary term that no-one thinks are deliverable, at all. It’s a stunt. https://t.co/a09CZAjYE5
 — James Ball (@jamesrbuk) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 9.52am GMT 
 Whitty tells Covid inquiry it would have been 'inconceivable' to have had herd immunity as policy goal  
 Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England and chief medical adviser for the UK, is still giving evidence to the Covid inquiry this morning. I’m mostly focused on the autumn statement, but my colleague Peter Walker is following the Whitty evidence, and he has posted these on X.
We’re back with Chris Whitty at the Covid inquiry, and still in mid-March 2020. Even then with 500+ UK cases, Whitty says, many in No 10 still did not realise how fast things would move: “This was a lot of people really not getting what exponential growth was going to mean.”
enltrWe're back with Chris Whitty at the Covid inquiry, and still in mid-March 2020. Even then with 500+ UK cases, Whitty says, many in No 10 still did not realise how fast things would move: “This was a lot of people really not getting what exponential growth was going to mean.”
— Peter Walker (@peterwalker99) November 22, 2023
We’re now onto the idea of herd immunity, which Whitty says was misunderstood by many. It would be “inconceivable” to have it as a policy goal, and would have brought “extraordinarily high loss of life”, while v possibly not even doing what it was meant to.
Whitty on herd immunity: “My view is it was clearly a ridiculous goal of policy, and a dangerous one, and lots of what was said [about it] could have led to considerable confusion, and did.”
Chris Whitty says he sent WhatsApps to a group including Boris Johnson, Matt Hancock and officials urging people to not discuss herd immunity: “Frankly there was a lot of chatter by people who at best half understood the issues.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.56am GMT
block-time published-time 9.46am GMT 
Cabinet ministers were told what would be in the autumn statement when they met at Downing Street this morning. They don’t talk to journalists as they leave, but judging by the pictures, they seemed rather pleased by what they had heard. Government ministers don’t normally look this cheerful.
    Left to right: Victoria Prentis, the attorney general; Laura Trott, the chief secretary to the Treasury; and Alex Chalk, the justice secretary, leaving cabinet.  Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters      James Cleverly, the home secretary, leaving cabinet. Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters      Chris Heaton-Harris, the Northern Ireland secretary; and Gillian Keegan, the education secretary, leaving cabinet. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA      David Cameron, the foreign secretary (left); and Andrew Mitchell, development minister, leaving cabinet. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA      Michelle Donelan, the science secretary, leaving cabinet. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA      Victoria Atkins, the health secretary, leaving cabinet. Photograph: Hannah McKay/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.51am GMT
block-time published-time 9.24am GMT 
 Jeremy Hunt to unveil autumn statement as Labour says nothing can change Tories’ ‘appalling’ economic record  
Good morning. Today Jeremy Hunt will deliver his second autumn statement since (like his old boss David Cameron) he made a totally unexpected return to cabinet, appointed chancellor as Liz Truss’s premiership was in its death throes. After he delivered his first one just over a year ago, the Guardian’s report  led on Britain facing the biggest hit to living standards on record after Hunt announced £30bn of delayed spending cuts and £25bn of backdated tax increases. The Tory papers gave it probably the most negative coverage  for any fiscal statement from a Conservative chancellor in modern times. Almost anything today would get a better reception.
But in fact, if the advance briefing is reliable, Hunt is on course to deliver a statement that will get a dramatically better reception. As Larry Elliott and Pippa Crerar report in their preview, he will announce cuts to personal taxes, and a significant raft of pro-business measures.
 Related:  Autumn statement: Jeremy Hunt looks to cut UK taxes and ‘turbo-charge growth’
Here are some of the front pages.
enltrTELEGRAPH: Biggest tax cut for businesses in 50 years #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/ZfBrXGpK7A
 — Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) November 22, 2023
enltrTHE TIMES: Hunt offers tax cuts for workers and businesses #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/VtZUCicNuD
 — Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) November 21, 2023
enltrFT UK: Hunt to put £9bn a year tax break for business at core of growth drive #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/KoZcpbDYPR
 — Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) November 21, 2023
Rishi Sunak and Conservative MPs hope that this will be a turning point in his party’s fortunes. In a speech on Monday , he in effect announced his party’s election strategy, saying it would be a choice between “a Conservative party that is delivering lower taxes because we have now halved inflation and control spending, or a Labour party that’s just going to borrow an enormous amount more, not having learned the lessons at all of not just the last 10 years, but of the last two years, and continue with the same failed prescription, which is more government, more borrowing, more spending”.
But one autumn statement cannot undo the impact of decisions taken over one year, or four years, or 13 years. And, as Torsten Bell, head of the Resolution Foundation thinktank has pointed out, you should never talk about tax cuts without explaining the context.
Short version: you’re not ‘cutting taxes’ if you raise people’s taxes a lot and then given them back a little
enltrShort version: you're not 'cutting taxes' if you raise people's taxes a lot and then given them back a little https://t.co/XnaNsEVMET
 — Torsten Bell (@TorstenBell) November 21, 2023
This is a point Labour will be making. In a statement released overnight, Rachel Reeves, the shadow chancellor, said:
After 13 years of economic failure under the Conservatives, working people are worse off. Prices are still rising in the shops, energy bills are up and mortgage payments are higher after the Conservatives crashed the economy.
The 25 Tory tax rises since 2019 are the clearest sign of economic failure, with households paying £4,000 more in tax each year than they did in 2010. The Conservatives have become the party of high tax because they are the party of low growth. Nothing the chancellor says or does in his autumn statement can change their appalling record.
Under Keir Starmer’s leadership, the Labour party has changed. Labour is now the party of fiscal responsibility, we are the party of business and we are the only party with a plan to make working people better off.
Today we will be focusing almost exclusively on the autumn statement. Graeme Wearden will be joining me on the blog later and we will be covering the statement in full, and providing reaction and analysis.
Here is the agenda.
8.30am: Rishi Sunak chairs cabinet, where Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, briefs colleagues on the autumn statement.
12pm: Sunak faces Keir Starmer at PMQs.
12.30pm: Hunt presents his autumn statement to the Commons.
2.30pm: Richard Hughes, chair of the Office for Budget Responsibility, holds a press conference on the OBR’s forecasts.
If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.15am GMT

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




European far right celebrates as exit poll puts Wilders’ party in front – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 22, 2023 Wednesday 6:51 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:12
Length: 5951 words
Byline: Lili Bayer
Highlight: Voters cast ballots until 9pm in elections that could set country on different course after Mark Rutte’s four consecutive governmentsRead our full report: Far-right party set to win most seats in Dutch elections, exit polls show
Body


block-time published-time 12.07am GMT 
This liveblog is closing now. You can read a full report on the general election here.  Thank you for reading.
block-time published-time 12.01am GMT 
 Summary of the evening  Dutch voters cast their ballots in a snap parliamentary election on Wednesday called after the collapse of the outgoing coalition government headed by Mark Rutte.Geert Wilders ’ far-right, anti-Islam Party for Freedom (PVV) is on course to be the largest party in the Dutch parliament, according to exit polls, in a major electoral upset whose reverberations will be felt around Europe.It is unclear whether Wilders – who has always been shut out of government – will be able to win enough support to form a coalition. He said this evening that “no party can ignore us any longer”.Exit polling put the PVV at 35 seats. The Green-Labour alliance, led by Frans Timmermans, has 25 seats, while the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), led by Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, got 24 seats, according to the polling.Yesilgöz-Zegerius said “it is big lesson to politicians. They haven’t listened enough to the people and haven’t offered enough workable solutions”.Far right figures from across the continent, including Marine Le Pen, Matteo Salvini  and Santiago Abascal, celebrated the PVV’s performance.Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, said that “the winds of change are here”.Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, said the Dutch election is “a reminder to progressives everywhere – the continued threat of the far-right is real and on our doorstep”.
Read more here  and stay tuned for more coverage on the Guardian site. 
    PVV leader Geert Wilders arrives at cafe Seepaardje to respond to the results of the House of Representatives elections. Photograph: Hollandse Hoogte/Shutterstock    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.02am GMT
block-time published-time 11.58pm GMT 
 Geert Wilders: the Dutch far-right figurehead sending a chill across Europe  
Known for his distinctive platinum-blond hairstyle and his aggressive anti-Islam and anti-immigration rhetoric, Geert Wilders  has been catapulted by the Dutch elections to the place he loves most to be: at the centre of attention.
From describing Islam as “an ideology of a retarded culture”  and calling Moroccans “scum”, Wilders, who is often compared to president Donald Trump for his inflammatory rhetoric and his use of social media, has long been a prominent fixture in the European far-right landscape.
Born in 1963 in southern Venlo, close to the German border, Wilders grew up in a Catholic family with his brother and two sisters. He entered politics as a member of the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), but left over what he saw as the party’s mild stance on Islam and immigration.
He founded the Freedom party (PVV) in 2004, placing anti-Islam policies at the heart of his party. Wilders said his disdain for Islam was fuelled by the assassination of the radical anti-Islam filmmaker Theo van Gogh in 2004  and his time spent in Israel on a kibbutz.
Read the full profile here.  
block-time published-time 11.51pm GMT 
The PVV has become the largest party in Rotterdam, while the Green-Labour alliance received the most votes in the city of Groningen, NOS reports.  
block-time published-time 11.44pm GMT 
The PVV has become the largest party in 25 out of the 32 municipalities that reported election results thus far, NRC reports.  
block-time published-time 11.15pm GMT 
It was not an easy night for the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) and its leader, Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius.
Here are photos from the VVD’s event this evening, from Senay Boztas.
    Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius with VVD supporters on election night Photograph: Senay Boztas      VVD election night event Photograph: Senay Boztas    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.08pm GMT 
 Geert Wilders’ far-right, anti-Islam Party for Freedom (PVV) is on course to be the largest party in the Dutch parliament, according to exit polls, in a major electoral upset whose reverberations will be felt around Europe.
The PVV, whose manifesto includes calls for bans on mosques, the Quran and Islamic headscarves in government buildings, was predicted to win 35 seats in the 150-seat parliament, more than double the number it won in the previous 2021 ballot.
However, it is unclear whether Wilders – whose party has finished second and third in previous elections, but always been shut out of government – will be able to win enough support to form a coalition with a working parliamentary majority.
Wilders, who has been under police protection since 2004 and in 2016 was convicted of discrimination after he called Moroccans “scum” at a campaign rally, is likely to start sounding other party leaders out on Friday.
Although the party that wins the most seats traditionally provides the next prime minister, it is by no means guaranteed to do so. Mark Rutte will remain in a caretaker role until a new government is installed, which might not be before next spring.
 Tom van der Meer, a political scientist at the University of Amsterdam, described the result as “the biggest shift we have ever seen in the Netherlands”. Wilders had surged a wave of anti-immigration sentiment and frustration with cross-party coalitions, he told the public broadcaster NOS.
Jon Henley, Pjotr Sauer and Senay Boztas
Read the full story here.  
block-time published-time 10.49pm GMT 
 Geert Wilders thanks PVV voters.
nlltrPVV-STEMMERS BEDANKT! ?? #verkiezingen2023 pic.twitter.com/qWKf4Axa6j
 — Geert Wilders (@geertwilderspvv) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.37pm GMT 
The leader of Spain’s far right Vox party, Santiago Abascal, has congratulated Geert Wilders.
“More and more Europeans demand in the streets and at the polls that their nations, their borders and their rights be defended,” he said.
esltrFelicidades @geertwilderspvv.  Cada vez más europeos exigen en la calle y en las urnas que se defiendan sus naciones, sus fronteras y sus derechos. https://t.co/orT1wajE23
 — Santiago Abascal ???? (@Santi_ABASCAL) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.38pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.34pm GMT 
 As we wait for results, here are more photos from election night in the Netherlands. 
    Supporters of Geert Wilders in Scheveningen react to exit poll results that strongly indicate a victory for his party. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images      Supporters of the left progressive party Green Links PvdA listen to the televised speech of Geert Wilders. Photograph: Pierre Crom/Getty Images      BBB leader Caroline van der Plas (C) reacts during the BBB results evening for the House of Representatives elections, in Bathmen. Photograph: Robin Utrecht/EPA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.18pm GMT 
Historian and commentator Timothy Garton Ash  says the news from the Netherlands is  “exactly what we have started to fear for European elections next year”.
enltrShocking news from the Netherlands of election triumph for Geert Wilders… exactly what we have started to fear for European elections next year… #Wilders #Nederland
 — Timothy Garton Ash (@fromTGA) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 10.16pm GMT 
 Dutch election 'reminder' of far-right 'threat', London mayor says  
 Sadiq Khan, the mayor of London, has weighed in on the Dutch election exit polling.
“A reminder to progressives everywhere – the continued threat of the far-right is real and on our doorstep,” he wrote  on social media, adding: “The next year is going to be pivotal for standing up for and defending our values - in London, in Europe and across the world.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.14pm GMT 
 Tom Van Grieken, leader of Belgian far right party Vlaams Belang, also congratulated Geert Wilders.
“It is clear: the population is yearning for real change,” he said, adding: “Not only in the Netherlands, but also in Flanders. Parties like ours are coming all over Europe!
nlltr“Ik wens @geertwilderspvv  van harte te feliciteren met deze overwinning. Het is duidelijk: de bevolking smacht naar echte verandering. Niet alleen in Nederland, maar ook in Vlaanderen. Partijen als de onze komen eraan in heel Europa!” @tomvangrieken https://t.co/JtRNsNvGV4
 — Vlaams Belang (@vlbelang) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 10.08pm GMT 
 Everyone still belongs, Timmermans says  
 Frans Timmermans, the candidate for the Green-Labour alliance (GL-PvdA), has undercored that despite the exit poll results, everyone still belongs in today’s Netherlands. 
“If you encounter people in the neighborhood, at school or at work in the coming days who think: do I still belong here? Then you say clearly: YES.” 
nlltrWij laten in Nederland niemand los. Als je in de komende dagen in de buurt, op school, of op je werk mensen tegenkomt die denken: hoor ik hier nog wel? Dan zeg je duidelijk: JA. GroenLinks-PvdA is mede de linkse samenwerking aangegaan om te zeggen: we’ve got your back. pic.twitter.com/hnltspzCK8
 — Frans Timmermans (@F__Timmermans) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.42pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.02pm GMT 
Italian deputy prime minister Matteo Salvini has also congratulated Geert Wilders. 
“A new Europe is possible,” he said. 
itltrCongratulazioni all’amico @geertwilderspvv , leader del PVV ???? e storico alleato della Lega, per questa straordinaria vittoria elettorale. Una nuova Europa è possibile: appuntamento domenica 3 dicembre a Firenze. pic.twitter.com/0DnRBG03Cp
 — Matteo Salvini (@matteosalvinimi) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 9.50pm GMT 
 Outcome 'disappointing' and 'big lesson', VVD leader says  
 Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, leader of the VVD, was perfectly styled as ever but struggled on stage to maintain her optimism in a very short speech on election night. 
“For us, the result is disappointing,” she said. “I think that it is big lesson to politicians. They haven’t listened enough to the people and haven’t offered enough workable solutions. We will no longer lead the way but I am incredibly proud of the party.”
She congratulated the “winners” of the election, Geert Wilders, Frans Timmermans, Pieter Omtzigt “and of course the other winners”.
She added: 
We want to keep going from today. This is a new chapter, we will keep building with the lessons that we have learned, and we will build a Netherlands that we believe in.
Yesilgöz-Zegerius told Dutch media off stage it was unlikely the VVD would sit in a government under Wilders as prime minister. 
“I have said that I don’t see that happening because Mr Wilders cannot form a majority,” she said. “But he has the lead, he is the big winner of the evening, and he needs to show if he can form a majority. I have said that I didn’t see that this country would have a leader who does not bring together all Dutch people, who is there for all of the Dutch, but above all I don’t see a majority forming”. 
She denied that she had made a strategic error to open the door to Wilders, rather than excluding him as Mark Rutte had done for years. 
“I don’t think so,” she said. “This is about the worries of people who don’t feel listened to. 
This result clearly shows that the concerns of the voters that we have been hammering on for months, and that - not for nothing - the government fell over, are real. Politics in general hasn’t picked up on these worries and offered good solutions. 
She did not express any regrets. “I thought it was a good campaign, we all did our best and the voter has spoken and that’s the good thing about democracy. Now Mr Wilders has the lead and we will see.”
The right wing block does not have appeared to grow much - from 62 seats to 63 votes, based on exit polling - but they have been concentrated on the PVV, Dutch political experts pointed out on the NOS. 
To have a majority, a government needs 76 of 150 seats.
    Dutch party leader of VVD, Dilan Yesilgoz reacts to exit poll and early results in the Dutch parliamentary elections, in The Hague, Netherlands, November 22, 2023.  Photograph: Piroschka van de Wouw/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.43pm GMT 
 Geert Wilders ’ far-right, anti-Islam Party for Freedom (PVV) is on course to win the most seats in Dutch parliamentary elections , according to usually reliable exit polls, leaving the country facing months of fraught coalition negotiations.
The poll predicted Wilders’ party would win 35 seats in the 150-seat parliament, far ahead of a GreenLeft-Labour alliance (GL/PvdA) on 26 seats and the liberal-conservative People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) of outgoing prime minister Mark Rutte.
With no party scoring more than 25% of the vote, however, coalition negotiations could prove even longer and more complex than after the previous 2019 elections when four coalition partners took a record 271 days to hammer out an agreement.
Most parties, including GL/PvdA and NSC, have ruled out entering a coalition with the PVV, and while Rutte’s VVD – now headed by outgoing justice minister Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius – has been open to the idea, it will not accept Wilders as prime minister.
The shape of the new coalition could have a major impact on the Netherlands’ immigration and climate policies as well as relations with its European partners. 
Read the full story here.  
    Geert Wilders, Dutch right-wing politician and leader of the Party for Freedom (PVV), reacts to the exit poll and early results that strongly indicate a victory for his party in the Dutch elections on November 22, 2023 in Scheveningen, Netherlands.  Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 9.32pm GMT 
 More photos from a surprising election night in the Netherlands. 
    PVV leader Geert Wilders (R) is hugged as he responds to the results of the House of Representatives elections in Scheveningen, Netherlands, 22 November 2023.  Photograph: Remko de Waal/EPA      Polling station members count the votes entered on the ballot papers by eligible voters of the House of Representatives elections in Rotterdam, Netherlands, 22 November 2023. Photograph: Iris van den Broek/EPA      VVD leader Dilan Yesilgoz (C) responds to the results of the House of Representatives elections in The Hague, Netherlands, 22 November 2023.  Photograph: Koen van Weel/EPA      
block-time published-time 9.20pm GMT 
French far right politician Marine Le Pen has congratulated Geert Wilders and the PVV.
“Their spectacular performance,” she said, “confirms the growing attachment to the defence of national identities”.
frltrFélicitations à @geertwilderspvv  et au PVV pour leur performance spectaculaire aux législatives qui confirme l’attachement croissant à la défense des identités nationales. C’est parce qu’il est des peuples qui refusent de voir s’éteindre le flambeau national que l’espoir du…
— Marine Le Pen (@MLP_officiel) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.17pm GMT 
Minorities are concerned about the performance of Geert Wilders’ Party for Freedom.
 Muhsin Köktas of the Contact Body for Muslims and Government (CMO) wonders whether muslims still have a future in the Netherlands. “Everyone is talking about social security, but I don’t know if we still have it,” he said, NOS reported. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.07pm GMT 
 Caroline van der Plas, leader of the Farmer–Citizen Movement (BBB), said she is happy with the 7 seats won and that with the party’s 16 senate seats, “no one can ignore us anymore”. 
nlltrHeel blij met 7 zetels! De enige partij met 1 zetel die flink heeft geplust. Met de 16 Eerste Kamerzetels kan niemand meer om ons heen! Met @geertwilderspvv , @NwSocContract  en GroenLinks-PvdA ook de enige partij die wijst heeft geboekt! Het Kabinet is afgestraft door de kiezer
— Caroline van der Plas (@lientje1967) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 9.03pm GMT 
Alternative for Germany is also celebrating the Dutch exit polls. 
“Everywhere in Europe, citizens want political change,” the German far right party wrote on social media. 
deltrGefeliciteerd @geertwilderspvv  met dit grote succes. Overal in Europa willen de burgers een politieke verandering! Herzlichen Glückwunsch an @geertwilderspvv  zu diesem großen Erfolg. Überall in Europa wollen die Bürger den politischen Wechsel! #wilders #PVV  …
— AfD (@AfD) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 9.02pm GMT 
More congratulations are pouring in from the European far right. 
The Austrian Freedom Party’s Harald Vilimsky said “our political partners and friends are ahead almost everywhere”. 
deltrUnsere politischen Partner und Freunde haben fast überall die Nase vorne. Ich freue mich und gratuliere herzlich! #idgroup https://t.co/m3gnZGkLIs
 — Harald Vilimsky (@vilimsky) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 8.59pm GMT 
 Rem Korteweg, a senior research fellow at the Clingendael Institute, points out that – based on the exit polling – a coalition of VVD, NSC, GL/PvdA and D66 would have one seat more than a coalition consisting of PVV, VVD and NSC.
nlltrOp basis van exitpoll: Coalitie 1: 78 zetels Coalitie 2: 79 zetels (+ D66) https://t.co/vbCBheHqWf
 — Rem Korteweg (@remkorteweg) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 8.55pm GMT 
 Orbán congratulates Wilders: 'Winds of change are here'  
Hungary’s prime minister Viktor Orbán was quick to offer his congratulations to far right Dutch politician Geert Wilders. 
“The winds of change are here,” the Hungarian leader said. 
enltrThe winds of change are here! Congratulations to @geertwilderspvv  on winning the Dutch elections! pic.twitter.com/yhlLVcuP5J
 — Orbán Viktor (@PM_ViktorOrban) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 8.52pm GMT 
 Second exit poll result published  
A second exit poll  is now available. 
 Geert Wilders ’ Party for Freedom is still at 35 seats in this poll. 
The Green-Labour alliance, led by Frans Timmermans, has 25 seats, while the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), led by Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, got 24 seats, according to the second poll. 
This exit poll, unlike the first, includes voters who cast ballots in the last half hour of voting. 
block-time published-time 8.39pm GMT 
 'No party can ignore us', Wilders declares  
Far-right leader Geert Wilders has addressed cheering supporters.
In his first reaction to the exit poll, the PVV leader said he wanted to form a government.
“No party can ignore us any longer after we got 35 seats,” he declared.
Far right figures across Europe, from Hungary’s Viktor Orbán to France’s Marine Le Pen, congratulated Wilders. 
Exit polling showed Wilders’ Party for Freedom with the most seats, followed by the Green-Labour alliance, led by Frans Timmermans, with 25 seats. 
The People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), led by Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius, got 24 seats, according to the exit polling. 
    Geert Wilders addresses supporters. Photograph: Peter Dejong/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.35pm GMT 
 Deflated mood at Green-Labour election party  
There’s a tangibly deflated mood at the GroenLinks-PvdA election party in Amsterdam following the announcement of the first exit poll that showed the far-right Party for Freedom of Geert Wilders winning 35 seats, more than any other party.
GroenLinks-PvdA, an alliance between the two largest Dutch leftwing parties, GroenLinks (GL) and the Labour Party (PvdA), received 26 seats in the first exit poll.
“This is absolutely shocking. I don’t know what to say,” said Marc Schilderman, a longtime PvdA party member.
“I can’t believe almost a quarter of this country has voted for a party that goes against our constitutional rights,” he said, referring to Wilders’ pledges to shut down mosques and ban the Qur’an in the Netherlands.
Much will depend on a coalition-building process, with both the leader of GroenLinks-PvdA Frans Timmermans and the head of the socially liberal People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius , ruling out a government under Wilders.
“Let’s hope no one caves in and decides to form a coalition with Wilders. That way Timmermans can still become prime minister,” said Schilderman.
    Supporters of Frans Timmermans react to the first exit poll. Photograph: Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.38pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.32pm GMT 
 Tarik Abou-Chadi, an associate professor in European politics at the University of Oxford, says this evening that it’s “a watershed moment for liberal democracies”. 
enltrThe Netherlands will join an increasingly long list of West European countries (CH, FR, IT, SE) where the radical right has overtaken the mainstream right has the main party of the right. A watershed moment for liberal democracies. pic.twitter.com/IFI98B7TK6
 — Tarik Abou-Chadi (@tabouchadi) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 8.30pm GMT 
 Shock in VVD camp  
VVD members, in a packed room at the Fokker Terminal in The Hague, were shocked following the publication of a first exit poll showing the far right Party for Freedom of Geert Wilders got the most seats, by a stretch.
“I expected the results to be closer together,” said Jelleke van Rantwijk, 44, from The Hague. “I thought the VVD would lose seats - that’s not a shock if you have been in power for 13 years. But the PVV is a shock: 35 votes versus 23. But nobody wants to go with him.”
Bart de Bart, 35, from The Hague, said: “It’s a feeling like when Trump won. We never expected it. The people who voted for him are the losers of globalism but he won’t do anything for them. If we close the borders, we will lose jobs.”
Manon Stevens, 49, from Breda, said: “It’s kind of historic. But how can he be the prime minister for Muslims? I’m very curious. There’s no rule that the biggest party is the prime minister. But I think this is the least clear result we have ever had.”
Martijn Kooijman, another VVD member, said: “To put it mildly, this is a disappointment. It’s only the exit poll: it’s not the count. I expected we would lose six seats but not this - this is a big drop. I hoped we would be bigger than GreenLeft/Labour.”
Would the VVD work in a Wilders government? “We can try it,” he said. “He does stand for something. It is what it is.”
    Supporters of Dilan Yesilgoz, the leader of VVD, react to exit poll and early results in the Dutch parliamentary elections, in The Hague, Netherlands, November 22, 2023. Photograph: Piroschka van de Wouw/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.21pm GMT 
In a surprise twist, the first exit poll shows the far-right Party for Freedom of Geert Wilders winning 35 seats, more than any other party.
We’re now waiting for results. But even if the exit polling is confirmed as accurate, much will depend on a coalition-building process.
    Supporters of Dutch far-right politician and leader of the PVV party Geert Wilders react to the exit poll and early results in the Dutch parliamentary elections, in The Hague, Netherlands, November 22, 2023. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.14pm GMT 
 Wilders celebrates  
Far right politician Geert Wilders has posted a video on social media as he celebrates the PVV winning the most seats, according to a first exit poll. 
nlltr35!!!!!! PVV GROOTSTE PARTIJ ?? pic.twitter.com/oMANVYvGjy
 — Geert Wilders (@geertwilderspvv) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 8.11pm GMT 
Here’s how other parties performed in the first exit poll, conducted by Ipsos:
D66: 10 seats
BBB: 7 seats
CDA: 5 seats 
SP: 5 seats
PvdD: 4 seats 
FvD: 3 seats
CU: 3 seats
SGP: 3 seats
Volt: 2 seats
Denk: 2 seats
JA21: 1 seat
50Plus: 1 seat
block-time published-time 8.03pm GMT 
 First exit poll published, after voting ends in Dutch election  
Voting has ended in the Netherlands. A first exit poll, conducted by the Ipsos research agency, shows the far right Party for Freedom, led by Geert Wilders, got the most seats by a stretch.
However, the  numbers may still shift during the evening as we wait for results, and much will now depend on a coalition-building process. Many parties have said they would not join a coalition with Wilders.
 Here are the results of the exit poll  : 
Party for Freedom (PVV), led by Geert Wilders : 35 seats
Green-Labour alliance (GL/PvdA), led by Frans Timmermans : 26 seats
People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), led by Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius : 23 seats
New Social Contract (NSC), led by Pieter Omtzigt : 20
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.13pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.40pm GMT 
The first exit poll is expected in about 20 minutes. Stay tuned!
block-time published-time 7.26pm GMT 
 More pictures from election day in the Netherlands. 
    A woman votes, as her dog stands next to her, during the Dutch parliamentary elections in Maastricht, Netherlands, 22 November 2023. Photograph: Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters      Dutch citizens residing in Geuzenveld-Slotermeer, Amsterdam, cast their ballots. Photograph: Pierre Crom/Getty Images      People vote in the Hague. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.25pm GMT 
Turnout by 7:45pm stood at 66%, according to Ipsos, NOS reported. 
This is lower than turnout at the same time during the 2017 election.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.08pm GMT 
At the Anne Frank House museum in Amsterdam, where a young Anne Frank hid from a Nazi occupation, the doors were open for the first time as a polling station – and after voting, people could see the museum and were given a small, red pencil inscribed with a quote from Anne Frank: “How wonderful it is that no one has to wait a minute to change the world!”
Ronald Leopold, Executive Director of the Anne Frank House said that the museum had decided to welcome Amsterdammers as a recognition of the importance of democratic values. “The Anne Frank House calls attention to the vital importance of freedom, equal rights and democracy,” he said in a statement.
He added:
Anne Frank was born in a democratic country, but four years later her homeland had become a dictatorship. It’s important to realise that democracy is fragile and that we must cherish our democratic values. The right to vote is the foundation of our democratic rule of law.
Anne, 28, from Amsterdam, said:
I was on my way to the Westerkerk church, where I was going to vote and I thought this was an unusual location. It’s an extraordinary historical place of oppression and exclusion, to exercise your democratic right to vote. I knew which party to vote for, the person not so much. I voted for a woman from the GreenLeft/Labour. It’s not a strategic vote but I hope the PVV won’t win – I really hope it.
Mirjam Stoker, 52, from Amsterdam, went to the museum after voting for GreenLeft/Labour, having previously often voted Labour.
“Anne Frank couldn’t vote and we have the freedom to do it – so it seemed like a beautiful thing to do. You get a pencil you can keep, which is lovely.
I voted a bit strategically, and I hope that it is more left than right in the way it goes. I’m a bit scared of the PVV: government needs to stay a bit in the middle and I hope people keep talking. Wilders has said he won’t keep everything [in his manifesto] but that’s not my experience. But he was a good debater, the only one who could take on Rutte.”
Diana, 61, of Surinamese background but born in the Netherlands and from Amsterdam, said: “I voted for my children and my grandchildren. I don’t know if it’s left or right: I did the Stemwijzer voting tool.”
John, 62, an immigrant from Suriname who lives in Amsterdam, did not want to share the party he voted for but said he couldn’t understand the current issues around immigration. “I grew up with all kinds of nationalities,” he said. “I can’t understand all of the hate. History tells us how Jewish people were oppressed and now it’s happening again.”
Gesturing at the nearby Prinsengracht canal, glittering in the sunlight, he added: “The world is so beautiful and people spoil it. The birds fly, the fish swim, we are the evil-doers.”
    The commemorative Anne Frank vote for a better future pencil Photograph: Senay Boztas    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.09pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.05pm GMT 
 What are the issues in the Dutch election today? 
The last government fell over a bill to reduce asylum seekers, and cutting immigration – including foreign workers – remains a key issue for all main parties, as does the Dutch housing crisis: government-commissioned research suggests the country lacks 390,000 homes.
The green transition – and who will pay for it – is also high on the agenda amid heated debate in the the world’s second largest agricultural exporter, particularly over how to halve illegal nitrogen emission levels and by what date.
Government scandals – delays in compensation to earthquake victims living above the huge Groningen gas field  ; 20,000 families being wrongly accused of child benefit fraud, often on the basis of ethnicity  – have also pushed trust in politics to the fore.
 What happens after the vote? 
Given the highly fragmented state of Dutch politics, what coalitions are possible is just as important as who actually wins. MPs first appoint an informateur,  who sounds parties out and identifies possible alliances.
Once a viable coalition has been found, a formateur –  usually the head of the largest party – begins negotiating and drawing up the formal coalition agreement. Last time around, the whole process took a record 271 days. 
Read the full explainer here.  
block-time published-time 6.53pm GMT 
A steady stream of voters flocked on Wednesday afternoon to the iconic De Duif church in Amsterdam, which was repurposed for the day into a voting station.
Lisa, 28, an architect from Amsterdam who popped into the church to vote during her lunch break, said that she decided to vote “tactically” for the GreenLeft/Labour party to prevent Geert Wilders’ far-right party PVV from becoming the biggest.
Lisa said:
At first I wanted to vote for one of the smaller left-wing parties but once I saw the polls, I realised I had to vote for GreenLeft/Labour because I don’t want PVV to win. The environment and living conditions are the most important topics for me. I don’t foresee a left-wing government but this is the least I can do.
She added: “There is something grandiose about voting in De Duif … I love the stained glass windows and the massive church organ.”
Lisette, 47, a consultant from Amsterdam said she decided to vote for the People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) because of the “long-term stability the party brings.”
Internationally, I have been very happy with the way VVD’s Mark Rutte has presented our country. Yes, mistakes have been made, but I believe the party will learn from them.
Masha Silaevo, a Dutch student with Russian roots said she only decided this morning that she would vote for the Progressive Party for the Animals.
Silaevo said:
It was a last-minute decision, I thought about it a lot. Many of my left-leaning friends are voting strategically for GreenLeft/Labour because they hope the party becomes the biggest. I thought about it too, but there are a few topics that I disagree with them on, including their lack of support for Palestine. In the end, I wanted to stick to my convictions.
Stijn, 26, a student living in Amsterdam who grew up on a farm in the countryside, said he voted for the pro-farmer BBB movement.
I voted for the Farmer-citizen movement (BBB) because I know how hard it is for them. My parents are farmers and I know first-hand how much they struggle. Other parties go too far with their climate change proposals which is hurting normal working-class people. I don’t agree with everything that BBB proposes but I appreciate how they are trying to help the countryside.
Ruben Charbon, a small business owner in Amsterdam, said:
I voted for GreenLeft/Labour because of our future. As I got older, I started thinking less about what benefits me directly and more about our role on this planet and about climate change. The climate is one of my main reasons for voting for GreenLeft/Labour. I hope we can avoid a right-wing government, although I am not very optimistic.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.35pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.53pm GMT 
Here are photos of candidates Frans Timmermans, Geert Wilders and Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius casting their ballots earlier today.
    Former EU commissioner for climate action and leading candidate for the GroenLinks-PvdA party, Frans Timmermans, votes in the Dutch parliamentary elections in Maastricht. Photograph: Wolfgang Rattay/Reuters      Dutch far-right politician and leader of the PVV party, Geert Wilders, votes in the Hague. Photograph: Yves Herman/Reuters      Leader of VVD, Dilan Yesilgoz, votes in Amsterdam. Photograph: Piroschka van de Wouw/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.53pm GMT 
 Netherlands set for first new prime minister in 13 years as voters head to polls  
Dutch voters have voted in a knife-edge general election that will usher in the country’s first new prime minister in 13 years, with four parties from left to far right vying to become the largest in parliament.
With the latest polls indicating a rise  in support for Geert Wilders’ far-right Party for Freedom (PVV), the final days of campaigning have been marked by discussion over tactical voting and possible coalition arrangements.
The leader of the largely economically and socially liberal People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD), Dilan Yesilgöz-Zegerius , has broken precedent by saying she would work with Wilders if her party garnered the most votes – although on Tuesday  she ruled out supporting him as prime minister if he won the largest share.
If the VVD triumphs, Yesilgöz-Zegerius , a former refugee who champions  stricter migration controls, could become the Netherlands’ first female prime minister.
Frans Timmermans, the former EU heavyweight who returned to the Netherlands to lead a GreenLeft/Labour alliance, has appealed to voters to keep out a government in which the far-right plays a role. According to EenVandaag research , it appears to be having an effect, with almost half of his supporters voting strategically for him instead of smaller parties.
Pieter Omtzigt , leader of the New Social Contract (NSC) – a new centre-right party campaigning for better governance and controlled immigration – has also said he will not enter a coalition that contained Wilders’ party.
Read the full story here. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.53pm GMT 
A first exit poll in the Dutch election is expected at 9pm, with an updated one at 9.30pm.
By 3.45pm, 40% of 13 million voters had voted – slightly less than the figures in 2017 at the same time (43%). Pundits are not comparing today’s election to the 2021 one because, due to coronavirus, voters had three days to vote. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.51pm GMT 
 Welcome to the Dutch election blog  
Good evening and welcome to a special edition of the Europe blog, focusing on the Dutch election.
Voters across the Netherlands voted today in a knife-edge general election. Stay tuned for exit polls, results and reactions throughout the evening.
Send tips and comments to lili.bayer@theguardian.com
    Dutch citizens residing in Geuzenveld-Slotermeer cast their ballots on November 22, 2023 in Amsterdam, Netherlands.  Photograph: Pierre Crom/Getty Images    

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Democrats supporting Israel oppose Bernie Sanders’ plan for conditional aid
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:2
Length: 1225 words
Byline: Lauren Gambino in Washington
Highlight: Senator’s urge for US to make Israel reconsider military strategy is met with fierce backlash, underscoring rift on left over war in Gaza
Body


Bernie Sanders called on Congress to require Israel to change its policies as a condition to receiving US military aid – a statement that was met with fierce opposition by vocal Democratic supporters of the Jewish state, underscoring a deepening rift on the left over the Biden administration’s response to the war.
In a statement on Saturday, Sanders, a leading progressive voice, proposed leveraging US security assistance as a way of forcing Israel to reconsider its military strategy amid its bombardment and blockade of Gaza that has led to spiraling death, dislocation and destruction across the territory.
“While Israel has the right to go after Hamas, [Israeli prime minister Benjamin] Netanyahu’s rightwing extremist government does not have the right to wage almost total warfare against the Palestinian people,” Sanders said in the statement. “That is morally unacceptable and in violation of international law.”
Israel’s response to the murderous 7 October attack by Hamas – which left 1,200 people dead and roughly 240 taken hostage, the vast majority of whom were civilians, according to Israeli officials – has caused a humanitarian crisis in Gaza. More than 13,000 Palestinians – most of them women and children – have been killed, according to Palestinian health authorities.
Sanders issued his call as Democrats faced mounting pressure from the party’s voters to support a ceasefire in the weeks-long war. Sanders himself has faced criticism from his progressive supporters over his reluctance to endorse their push for a ceasefire.
Joe Biden, who has emphatically backed Israel, has seen his support among Democrats drop dramatically, as majorities of Americans disapprove of his handling of the Israel-Hamas war and foreign policy more broadly.
An NBC News poll released  over the weekend found that a majority of Democrats – 51% – believe Israel’s military response in Gaza has gone “too far”, versus 27% who say its actions are “justified”. The discontent was especially pronounced among younger voters: nearly seven in 10 voters between the ages of 18 and 34 disapproved of the US president’s handling of the war.
It comes amid reports  that a number of House and Senate Democrats have engaged in discussions about how to impose conditions on future military aid. Politico reported that the conversations among progressives were “preliminary” but that the White House was aware that “administration allies could openly push for conditions in the near future”.
Sanders’ demands include a postwar commitment by Israel to pursue “broad peace talks for a two-state solution” as well as to ensure displaced Gazans are able to return to their homes and that Israel will not reoccupy or continue its blockade of the enclave.
Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a Democrat of New York, called  Sanders’ proposal a “responsible course of action”.
“The United States has a legal and moral responsibility to ensure that public resources do not facilitate gross violations of human rights and international law,” she wrote on Twitter/X.
Ocasio-Cortez is part of a growing number of House Democrats who have publicly called on Biden to support a ceasefire. What began as a call by 12 progressive House Democrats has now expanded to include more than three dozen members, including several Jewish Democrats.
The idea of conditioning aid was also raised in a New York Times op-ed by Josh Paul, who recently resigned from his position as the former director in the state department’s political-military affairs bureau to protest against the US decision to continue sending weapons into the conflict in Gaza.
“If the United States is to continue to employ military and security assistance as a tool of its engagement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (and there are good arguments why it should not), it must change its approach significantly,” he wrote on Friday.  “One way to do this would be simply by applying the laws and policies that it applies to every other country in the world: There is no point in having leverage that could pressure Israel to cease actions that undermine peace if we refuse to even consider using it.”
But any effort from Democrats to put restrictions on Israel has been met by furious backlash.
“Conditioning aid to Israel will only have one outcome: it would help Hamas in their goal of completely annihilating Israel and the Jewish people,” said  congressman Josh Gottheimer, a New Jersey Democrat. “It would weaken America’s national security and our fight against terror.”
Congressman Jared Moskowitz, a Florida Democrat, warned that if Sanders attached “political requirements” to aid for Israel, he would work to “remove those conditions or condition [a]id to Gaza that requires the removal of Hamas”.
“Let’s not play this game,” Moskowitz wrote on X.  “Send the aid to both.”
Meanwhile, several Democrats compared Sanders’ proposal to a decision by the House speaker, Mike Johnson, to tie the $14.3bn aid package to Israel to $14.3bn in spending cuts  to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
“I didn’t agree with conditioning aid to Israel when Republicans did it and I don’t agree if Democrats are trying to do it,” Congressman Jake Auchincloss, a Massachusetts Democrat, wrote. 
Asked about the growing calls among progressives, Senator Richard Blumenthal, a Connecticut Democrat, said he would oppose applying such “criteria” on assistance to one of the US’s closest allies.
“I don’t know how the United States Congress, which has yet to pass a budget, can impose conditions for combat on an ally that is trying to defend itself as it has a right and responsibility to do under some of the most difficult conditions of warfare in recent history,” he said in a Sunday appearance on NBC’s Meet the Press. “I would be very loth to impose conditions that would, in effect, straitjacket or handcuff the IDF in this very, very excruciatingly difficult challenge.”
Amid international outcry over the Gazan civilian death toll under Israel’s bombardment and ground invasion, the Biden administration is increasingly raising concerns about the scale of the violence caused by Israel’s military campaign in Gaza, as well as its postwar plans for the territory. It is also frustrated by the Israeli settler violence in the occupied West Bank, which has escalated since the 7 October attack.
In a Washington Post op-ed , Biden wrote on Saturday that the US was prepared to impose sanctions, including visa bans, against Israeli settlers who attack Palestinian civilians in the West Bank.
“I have been emphatic with Israel’s leaders that extremist violence against Palestinians in the West Bank must stop and that those committing the violence must be held accountable,” he wrote.
Asked about the growing push to condition aid during an interview on Meet the Press, Jon Finer, the deputy national security adviser, said: “No assistance that the United States provides to any country is unconditional.”
He repeated that the US was committed to supporting Israel as it defends itself in response to the attacks of 7 October, but that Israel had an “obligation” to conduct “this conflict in a way that distinguishes civilians from noncombatants in a way that is proportional”.
Finer declined to say whether the White House was confident that Israel was following international law after Israeli forces raided Gaza’s largest hospital last week. 

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war is deadliest conflict on record for reporters, says watchdog
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 6:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 966 words
Byline: Robert Tait in Washington
Highlight: The IDF’s offensive in Gaza has killed 48 members of the press and caused a ‘news blackout’, says Committee to Protect Journalists
Body


Israel’s military offensive in Gaza has produced the deadliest month for journalists since statistics began more than three decades ago, and created a news blackout in the embattled territory, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) has said.
The reporters’ watchdog has recorded the deaths of 48 reporters since Hamas embarked on a murderous killing spree in Israel on 7 October, triggering a concerted Israeli bombardment and ground invasion of Gaza in response.
The committee had already labelled the first month after the Hamas attacks as the most lethal suffered by journalists since 1992 before six more Palestinian journalists were killed in Gaza over the weekend.
Five were killed on Saturday alone, making it the second deadliest of the war apart from the day of Hamas’ attack, when six journalists lost their lives.
The spiralling death toll over a six-week period compares with the 42 journalists killed worldwide in the whole of 2022, including 15 who died covering Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, widely considered a highly dangerous conflict for news media.
The CPJ says the lethal trend also far outstrips the 30 journalists killed at the height of the Syrian civil war, previously regarded as the deadliest war zone for journalists in recent times.
Now the organisation has issued an urgent plea to Israel and its western allies to reform the rules of engagement deployed by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) to prohibit the use of lethal force against journalists bearing press insignia.
Sherif Mansour, the committee’s coordinator for the Middle East and North Africa, said the rising number of media fatalities combined with successive cuts to internet and phone networks , and tightening censorship, were effectively imposing an information blackout on Gaza, a tiny coastal territory that is home to an estimated 2.3 million Palestinians. It meant a dearth of information for a population desperate to know where to obtain food, fuel and clean water, he said.
“Reporting the conflict has become so much more dangerous because of the exponential risk to local Palestinian journalists who are on the frontline and have no safe haven and no way out,” Mansour said.
“Also the Israeli army has refused to take any responsibility for the killings, saying to the international media organisations that they cannot guarantee the safety of the media or their employees.
“We have said, especially after the army targeted communications facilities, that we have reached a news blackout. We also have the problems with censorship, assaults and detentions in the West Bank.”
Ninety percent of the journalists killed have been Palestinians, with the exception of four Israeli reporters killed in the Hamas attacks, and one Lebanese citizen. The majority of the Palestinians killed have been freelancers and photo-journalists.
“They are the most needed right now but they are also the most vulnerable,” said Mansour.
Another nine journalists have been injured and a further three are missing. Thirteen have been arrested as part of what is described as an Israeli “censorship regime” introduced under emergency legislation making it an offence to damage “national morale” or “national security”.
It is unclear how many journalists were covering the conflict at the times of their deaths. But the CPJ is investigating each instance to see if reporters were caught in the crossfire while trying to do their jobs, Mansour added.
The grim tally has prompted the committee to renew calls initially made before the outbreak of the latest hostilities for Israel to reform its rules of engagement so that clearly identified journalists are protected.
“Last May, we said the IDF must change their rules of engagement to stop unleashing the use of lethal forces against journalists and media organisations,” said Mansour, who cited a previous CPJ report, Deadly Pattern, which said 13 out 20 journalists killed in Gaza before the current war had been wearing or carrying press markings at the time.
“We have not seen any indication that this has been done. This time, therefore, we have also called on Israel’s allies, including the United States, Britain and other European countries to pressure it to stop any use of lethal force against journalists.”
The call for protective measures follows claims this month by an Israeli media advocacy group, HonestReporting, that some international media outlets knew about Hamas’s 7 October attack in advance , citing the publication of pictures taken by local journalists showing the group storming into Israeli territory.
HonestReporting subsequently withdrew the accusations in the face of the organisations’ denials but not before the office of Benjamin Netanyahu , the Israeli prime minister, issued a statement calling journalists who had photographed the event accomplices in “crimes against humanity”. Benny Gantz, a member of the Israeli war cabinet, said they should be treated as terrorists and hunted down.
Days after the report, the home of Yasser Qudih, a freelance photographer who provided pictures of the Hamas attack to Reuters, was struck by four missiles. Qudih survived the strike but eight members of his family were killed. It is unclear whether Israel launched the strike.
Mansour called the HonestReporting claim a “smear campaign” that put Palestinian journalists’ lives in danger and said it was consistent with previous “false narratives” implying that Palestinian reporters were involved in terrorist activity.
“It doesn’t take hours or a genius in Gaza to know about Israeli army operations or Hamas operations,” he said. “You are talking about a 20-mile-long strip that is six miles wide. There are so many ways journalists could be at the scene – it doesn’t take any inside knowledge to open the window and look at the sky and see where the operation is.”

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Hamas leader says militant group ‘close’ to truce agreement with Israel
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 6:03 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1091 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Deal could include limited ceasefire and exchange of Israeli hostages for Palestinian prisonersIsrael-Hamas war: live updates
Body


Ismail Haniyeh, the most senior political leader of Hamas, has said a truce agreement with Israel may be close, raising hopes of both a pause in the Israeli offensive in Gaza and the release of at least some of the Israeli hostages the militant organisation is holding there.
“We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, and the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators.
Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson Majed Al-Ansari was on Tuesday quoted by the Times of Israel as saying “We are at the closest point we ever had been in reaching an agreement”. The deal would involve a multi-day pause in hostilities, the release of about 50 civilian hostages by Hamas and the release of Palestinian women and children held in Israeli custody, according to a source who briefed Reuters. 
Senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, have all suggested in recent days that an agreement is near, although observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse.
Analysts also point out that any deal agreed by the political leadership of Hamas overseas would have to be acceptable to political and military leaders in Gaza.
Izzat el Reshiq, another senior Hamas political leader, told Al Jazeera that continuing talks were for a truce that would last “a number of days” and include arrangements for the entry of aid in to Gaza, and a swap of hostages taken by Hamas for prisoners in Israeli jails. Reshiq, who like Haniyeh is based in Qatar, said the deal would include the release of Israeli women and children from Gaza in exchange for Palestinian women and children from “occupation prisons”.
Negotiators have been working to secure a deal to allow the release of about 240 mostly Israeli hostages who were seized on 7 October when Hamas launched attacks into Israel which killed more than 1,200 people, mostly civilians, in their homes or at a dance party. Qatar, where Hamas has a political office, has been mediating.
On Monday, the US president, Joe Biden, said he believed a deal to free the hostages was close. “I believe so,” Biden said when asked whether a hostage deal was near, and crossed his fingers.
The White House said the negotiations were in the “endgame” stage, but refused to give further details, saying it could jeopardise a successful outcome. 
“Sensitive negotiations like this can fall apart at the last minute,” the White House deputy national security adviser, Jon Finer, told NBC’s Meet the Press programme on Sunday. “Nothing is agreed until everything is agreed.”
Two sources familiar with the latest talks told Agence France-Presse that a tentative deal included a five-day truce, comprising a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations over southern Gaza.
In return, between 50 and 100 prisoners held by Hamas and Islamic Jihad – a separate Palestinian militant group – would be released. They would include Israeli civilians and captives of other nationalities, but no military personnel.
Under the proposed deal, 300 Palestinians would be released from Israeli jails, among them women and children, the sources said. This would be a significant propaganda coup for Hamas, and a personal victory for Yahya Sinwar, the Hamas leader in Gaza, who spent 22 years in Israeli prisons before being released in an exchange in 2011.
Sinwar tops Israel’s hitlist and his whereabouts are unknown, but his consent is essential for any agreement to be meaningful.
The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, is under domestic pressure to free the hostages. The challenge of doing this while completing the goal of eliminating Hamas as a military force capable of striking Israel again has led to disagreements among Israeli policymakers and the security establishment as well as society more broadly.
In recent days, support among senior military officers for a deal appears to have grown, with a new understanding that the release of the hostages should be the main objective of the Israeli offensive. Many within the Israeli security establishment have always believed that significant concessions were inevitable.
“We know we will have to pay a painful price,” one senior Israeli intelligence official told the Guardian last month.
Israeli media have reported divisions  among senior ministers, with some favouring accepting the deal reportedly tabled by Qatar before international pressure or rising military casualties weaken Israel’s bargaining position. Israel has reported the loss of 66 soldiers in the offensive so far.
Others argue that Israel should hold out for better terms and that to accept those on offer would set a precedent for future negotiations to obtain the freedom of any remaining hostages.
On Monday, relatives of the hostages clashed with far-right members  of Netanyahu’s government. So far, four of those held have been released, two have been found dead and one rescued.
Not all of the hostages are held by Hamas, with some in the hands of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a separate extremist faction, and criminals in Gaza, Israeli and other officials say.
Separately, the International Committee of the Red Cross said on Monday that its president had travelled to Qatar to meet Haniyeh “to advance humanitarian issues related to the armed conflict in Israel and Gaza”.
According to the Hamas government in Gaza, the Israeli offensive has killed more than 13,300 people, thousands of them children.
A further 17 Palestinians were killed in an Israeli bombardment of Nuseirat camp in central Gaza at midnight, the official Palestinian news agency Wafa reported early on Tuesday. There was no immediate comment from Israel.
Gaza’s Hamas-run health ministry also said on Monday that at least 12 Palestinians had been killed and dozens wounded after a shell struck the second floor of the Indonesian hospital  in northern Gaza, which is surrounded by Israeli tanks.
Medics there fear the hospital, the only one which up until Monday was still able to treat patients in the north of the territory, could suffer the same fate as al-Shifa hospital, which was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces last week.
A medical worker, Marwan Abdallah, said the tanks were clearly visible from the hospital windows about 200 metres away and that Israeli snipers could be seen on nearby rooftops. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire,” he said.
Israel denied it had hit the hospital, while staff deny there were any armed militants on the premises.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




US has wrecked chances of peace in Middle East, Putin tells Brics summit
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 6:24 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 937 words
Byline: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor
Highlight: Russian president blames US for Gaza conflict as he attempts to woo global south Israel-Hamas war – live updates
Body


US unilateralism has wrecked the chances of peace in the Middle East, Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, told a crisis Brics meeting on Gaza as he attempted to woo leaders of the global south.
The virtual meeting of 11 nations, convened by South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, came as Arab foreign ministers toured capitals to drum up support for a fresh UN security council resolution mandating Israel to introduce a full ceasefire and end what they say are breaches of international humanitarian law.
The moves are the latest sign of a revolt brewing among global south nations about US double standards in refusing to do more to stop the Israeli bombardment of Gaza, which so far has claimed more than 13,000 civilian lives, according to the Palestinian health ministry.
The UN security council last week made a call, not amounting to an instruction, for Israel to accept humanitarian pauses, but the Arab foreign ministers want a firmer resolution and are prepared to challenge the US not to use its veto to protect Israel. It was notable that the Arab foreign ministers, including those not allied to Iran, chose to travel first to China and Moscow to enlist their support.
Putin told the Brics meeting that the US was undermining the chances of peace by trying to monopolise diplomacy in its own self-interest. He said that “the deaths of thousands of people, the mass displacement of civilians and the humanitarian catastrophe that has unfolded are deeply disturbing.
He added: “Due to the sabotage of UN efforts, more than one generation of Palestinians are being brought up with a sense of unfairness to their state while the Israeli people cannot fully guarantee their own security.”
Putin accused the US of sidelining other members of the Middle East Quartet – a group seeking to navigate the Israeli-Palestinian peace process that also includes Russia, the UN, and the EU. Washington has attempted to “monopolise the role of the mediator” while blocking the efforts of other international actors, he said. He added: “History has vividly demonstrated that attempts to single-handedly cut the Palestinian knot are not viable and counterproductive.” 
Other countries attending include Brazil, India, China, Iran, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, reflecting how the expanded Brics group is now a strong rival to the western G7 group of leading industrialised nations. 
The Chinese president, Xi Jinping, added his voice to the call for a ceasefire in Gaza, telling the summit: “All parties in the conflicts should immediately cease fire and hostilities, stop all violence and attacks targeting civilians, and release civilian detainees to avoid more loss of lives and suffering,”
Xi said: “The root cause of the Palestinian-Israeli situation is the fact that the right of the Palestinian people to statehood, their right to existence, and their right of return have long been ignored.” 
However, the eventual joint statement was relatively mild and called only for Israel to comply with international humanitarian law and accept “full, immediate, safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian access”. It also warned Israel not to attempt to displace Palestinans from Gaza.
The Biden administration has been repeatedly told, including by its own diplomats, that it risks losing the support of the global south nations. Many of them accuse the US of double standards in condemning Russian war crimes in Ukraine while remaining largely silent on Israel’s actions in Gaza.
Opening the Brics meeting, Ramaphosa accused Israel of committing war crimes that were tantamount to genocide and collective punishment. “The collective punishment of Palestinian civilians through the unlawful use of force by Israel is a war crime,” Ramaphosa said. “The deliberate denial of medicine, fuel, food and water to the residents of Gaza is tantamount to genocide.”
Iran’s president, Ebrahim Raisi called on the security council to adopt a binding resolution in UN general assembly to stop attacks on Gaza and to label Israel as a terrorist regime and its army as a terrorist organisation. He called for US to be held to account and urged the world to recognise the right of Palestinians to self-defence, a phrase that would absolve Hamas for its October attacks on Israel.
Mohammed bin Salman, the Saudi crown prince, criticised thekilling of innocent civilians and the destruction of health facilities and places of worship.
The Indian prime minister, Narenda Modi, did not attend.
The Brics meeting comes before a virtual meeting on Wednesday of the wider G20 group of nations, convened by India, that will be attended by Putin.
The delegation of Arab diplomats is being led by a group appointed by the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, including the foreign ministers of Jordan, Egypt, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Palestine and the secretary general of the Arab League.
They visited the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, in Beijing on Monday, before travelling to Moscow to meet the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov.
The delegation is expected also to visit France and the UK this week.
The Egyptian foreign ministry said the diplomats had “drafted a new resolution to be submitted to the security council by the Arab and Islamic groups, to deal with existing obstacles and imbalances of humanitarian aid entry to Gaza”.
Egypt’s foreign ministry said it remained convinced that the “continued bombing targeting displaced people in the south had a clear objective, and that was to force Gaza’s residents to leave the strip. Egypt has clearly declared its utter rejection of any attempt to enforce displacement of Palestinians”.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Israeli cabinet approves deal with for pause in fighting – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 4:30 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:46
Length: 20564 words
Byline: Helen Sullivan (now and earlier); Léonie Chao-Fong, Martin Belam and Gloria Oladipo
Highlight: This blog is now closed. Follow the latest news and updates from the Israel-Hamas war in our new live blog here.Israel and Palestine: a complete guide to the crisis
Body


block-time published-time 3.12am GMT 
This blog is closing now. Head to the link below for the latest: 
 Related:  Israel-Hamas war live: Israel and Hamas agree four-day ceasefire and release of 50 hostages held in Gaza
block-time published-time 2.50am GMT 
The senior US official also said Hamas needed the pause in fighting in order to locate some of the hostages, meaning they may be able to identify and collect additional women and children to be released.
They also said a rigorous inspection regime would ensure the militant group did not use the pause to get more weapons, according to Reuters.
Officials hope the pause in fighting will also be observed in northern Israel where there have been clashes between Hezbollah and Israeli forces. 
block-time published-time 2.40am GMT 
The total number of hostages freed could rise, a senior US official has said.
“The deal has ultimately been structured to incentivise releases beyond 50,” the official said adding that the agreement “is now structured for women and children in the first phase, but with an expectation for further releases.”
block-time published-time 2.35am GMT 
The Israeli military will remain “vigilant” during the truce, spokesman Jonathan Conricus has said, adding that it will “use the time to prepare for future operations”.
He said:
After the hostage deal is implemented, we will continue dismantling Hamas while respecting humanitarian law on the ground. 
block-time published-time 2.26am GMT 
Hamas will release 50 women and children under the age of 19 in exchange for 150 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli prisons, the militant group has said in a statement, according to Reuters.
The statement said the two sides had agreed to stop all fighting for four days and that Israel had agreed not to attack or arrest anyone in Gaza during that period.
Air traffic would stop completely in southern Gaza during the four days and for daily six-hour periods in the north, Hamas said.
Hundreds of trucks would be allowed in carrying humanitarian aid to all areas of Gaza, it continued.
block-time published-time 2.20am GMT 
Here’s our full report on the hostage deal:
Israel and Hamas have agreed a deal for the release of 50 women and children hostages held in Gaza in return for a four-day partial ceasefire, the Israeli government announced early on Wednesday.
The announcement from the prime minister’s office said the lull in Israeli military operations would be extended for an additional day for every 10 more hostages released. It did not say when the ceasefire would start, though in his address to his cabinet, Benjamin Netanyahu  said the first hostages should be free within 48 hours of the agreement.
Hamas confirmed an agreement had been reached and added that 150 Palestinian women and children would be freed from Israeli jails.
“The Israeli government is committed to the return of all abductees home,” the government statement said in a WhatsApp message. “Tonight, the government approved the outline for the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 abductees — women and children — will be released for four days, during which there will be a lull in the fighting. The release of every 10 additional abductees will result in an additional day of respite.”
 Related:  Israel and Hamas agree deal for release of hostages and partial ceasefire
block-time published-time 2.15am GMT 
 Three US citizens held by Hamas to be released as part of deal, US official says  
Three Americans held by Hamas in Gaza are expected to be among at least 50 hostages to be released by the Islamist Palestinian group under the deal arranged with Israel, the US and Qatar, a senior US official said according to Reuters.
The three include a 3-year-old girl whose parents were among the more than 1,200 people killed in Hamas’ initial 7 October attack on southern Israel, the official said. 
The official, speaking to reporters on condition of anonymity, said it was likely that more than 50 hostages, largely women and children, will be released once a pause in fighting takes hold.
The hostage group will include two American women and an American girl named Abigail who will turn four on Friday, the official said.
Initial releases of hostages are expected within 24 hours of the deal’s announcement, with the first likely to be freed Thursday morning, the official said.
“I would say it’s at least 50 of the women and children over a period of four to five days,” the official said, without providing details of any other nationalities expected to be released.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.28am GMT
block-time published-time 2.00am GMT 
 Israeli cabinet backs hostage deal that will free dozens held in Gaza: what we know  
Here is what we know about the hostage deal approved by Israel’s cabinet:
The Israeli Prime Minister’s office announced that Israel’s cabinet has voted to approve a deal that will see the release of 50 hostages, who are women and children, over four days, during which there will be pause in fighting in Gaza. A government statement on the deal said, “The Government of Israel is obligated to return home all of the hostages. Tonight, the Government has approved the outline of the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 hostages – women and children – will be released over four days, during which a pause in the fighting will be held. The release of every additional ten hostages will result in one additional day in the pause.”The deal cannot be enacted until Thursday to allow time for Israeli judges to review potential legal challenges to the release of prisoners, the New York Times and reports, citing Israeli officials.Groups of 12-13 hostages will be released per day, the Times of Israel reports, and fighting may be paused for more days if more hostages are released. Israel believes Hamas could potentially locate some 30 more Israeli mothers and children beyond the initial 50, the Times of Israel reports, and that the halt in fighting could be extended by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages who are located and freed, the government official said. “Hamas is claiming it cannot immediately track down around 10 children taken from Israel during the shock October 7 attack,” the Times of Israel reports. Axios reports that the deal also includes an agreement by Israel to allow “around 300 aid trucks per day to enter Gaza from Egypt” as well as additional fuel.Only three cabinet ministers opposed the deal, Axios and Al Jazeera report. The ministers opposed each belong to the Religious Zionism Party. 
block-time published-time 1.56am GMT 
 Israeli government statement  
Here is the full statement on the deal from the Israeli Government: 
The Government of Israel is obligated to return home all of the hostages. Tonight, the Government has approved the outline of the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 hostages – women and children – will be released over four days, during which a pause in the fighting will be held. The release of every additional ten hostages will result in one additional day in the pause. 
The Government of Israel, the IDF and the security services will continue the war in order to return home all of the hostages, complete the elimination of Hamas and ensure that there will be no new threat to the State of Israel from Gaza.
block-time published-time 1.43am GMT 
Only three cabinet ministers opposed the deal, Axios and Al Jazeera report. The ministers opposed each belong to the Religious Zionism Party. 
block-time published-time 1.42am GMT 
 Deal includes 'around 300 aid trucks per day' to enter Gaza from Egypt  
Axios reports that the deal also includes an agreement by Israel to allow “around 300 aid trucks per day to enter Gaza from Egypt” as well as additional fuel. 
enltrDetails on the hostage deal and pause in fighting that was just approved, from @BarakRavid https://t.co/X49wMctYac pic.twitter.com/BdjhlrLHrR
 — Allan Smith (@akarl_smith) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 1.39am GMT 
The deal cannot be enacted until Thursday to allow time for Israeli judges to review potential legal challenges to the release of prisoners, the New York Times reports, citing Israeli officials. 
The government has said in a WhatsApp message announcing the deal: 
“The Israeli government is committed to the return of all abductees home,” and: 
Tonight, the government approved the outline for the first stage of achieving this goal, according to which at least 50 abductees — women and children — will be released for 4 days, during which there will be a lull in the fighting. The release of every 10 additional abductees will result in an additional day of respite.”
block-time published-time 1.29am GMT 
 Pause in fighting could be extended if more hostages located by Hamas - Times of Israel  
The Times of Israel also reports that there may be 30 more hostages released and that the pause in fighting could be extended “by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages”: 
Israel believes Hamas could potentially locate some 30 more Israeli mothers and children beyond the initial 50, and that the halt in fighting could be extended by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages who are located and freed, the government official said. 
Hamas is claiming it cannot immediately track down around 10 children taken from Israel during the shock October 7 attack.”
block-time published-time 1.25am GMT 
 50 hostages, women and children, to be released over four days of pause in fighting - Israeli government  
Reuters reports that the Israeli Prime Minister’s office has announced that the deal, which has been approved by the cabinet, will see the release of 50 hostages, women and children, over four days, during which there will be pause in fighting. Groups of 12-13 hostages will be released per day, the Times of Israel reports.
The Times of Israel also reports that there may be 30 more hostages released and that the pause in fighting could be extended “by a day for each group of 10 more Israeli hostages”.
Earlier, Israeli media, including Channel 12 news, reported that if the deal was approved, the first release of hostages is expected on Thursday.
The delay is because if the deal is agreed to, there must be a 24-hour waiting period before it is implemented, to give Israeli citizens the chance to ask the Supreme Court to block the release of Palestinian prisoners, according to reports in Israeli media.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.35am GMT
block-time published-time 1.22am GMT 
 Ceasefire to last at least four days, Times of Israel reports  
The Times of Israel reports that in exchange for the release of hostages, “Israel has agreed to a ceasefire for at least four days for the first time since the outbreak of the war.”
block-time published-time 1.20am GMT 
 First hostages may be released on Thursday, if there is no challenge in Supreme Court  
Earlier, Israeli media, including Channel 12 news, reported that if the deal was approved, the first release of hostages is expected on Thursday.
The delay is because if the deal is agreed to, there must be a 24-hour waiting period before it is implemented, to give Israeli citizens the chance to ask the Supreme Court to block the release of Palestinian prisoners, according to reports in Israeli media.
block-time published-time 1.18am GMT 
 50 Israeli citizens to be released over a number of days, Times of Israel reports  
The Times of Israel reports, citing an unnamed government official, that the deal voted on by Israel’s cabinet will see the release of “50 living Israeli citizens, mostly women and children, in groups of 12-13 people per day.”
“There was no immediate details on how ministers voted. While the vast majority of the government’s 38 ministers backed the deal, representatives from the far-right Otzma Yehudit and Religious Zionism parties expressed opposition to the agreement ahead of the meeting,” the Times of Israel reports. 
“Not all details of the agreement have been formally released to the public, but an Israeli government official briefing reporters earlier Tuesday said that the deal is expected to see the release of 50 living Israeli citizens, mostly women and children, in groups of 12-13 people per day.”
block-time published-time 1.10am GMT 
 Hospitals in Israel preparing to receive hostages  
Six hospitals in Israel are preparing to receive hostages, Haaretz reports. “They have established designated compounds to receive them, separate from other patients and the media.”
block-time published-time 1.09am GMT 
The official Haaretz cites says that “all the branches of the Israeli security services – the IDF, the Shin Bet and the Mossad – support the planned deal. The official added that the agreement is only for Israelis who are still alive, adding that Hamas may release foreign nationals at the same time, in accordance with deals reached with those countries.”
block-time published-time 1.08am GMT 
 Israeli government approves hostages deal – Israeli media  
In breaking news: Israeli news organisations Haaretz and Kan, the national broadcaster, report that Israel’s cabinet has voted to approve the hostage deal, which would, Haaretz reports, “involve the exchange of hostages being held by the organization for Palestinian detainees in Israeli jails.”
Citing a senior Israeli official, Haaretz reports that “the plan will see Hamas release 30 kidnapped children, eight mothers and 12 more women during a five-day cease-fire.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.14am GMT
block-time published-time 12.54am GMT 
If you’re just joining us, here is where things stand: Israel’s government is meeting into the early hours of Wednesday to consider a deal for Palestinian Hamas militants to free some hostages in Gaza in exchange for a multi-day truce and the release of a greater number of Palestinian prisoners in Israel.
It is currently nearing 3am in Tel Aviv and Gaza City. Officials from Qatar, which has been mediating negotiations, as well as the US, Israel and Hamas have for days been saying a deal was imminent. Qatar Foreign Ministry spokesperson Majed Al-Ansari said the proposal on a hostage release deal was delivered to Israel in the early hours of Tuesday. “The State of Qatar is awaiting the result of the Israeli government’s vote on the proposal,” he said. Before gathering with his full government, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu met on Tuesday with his war cabinet and wider national security cabinet over the deal. A US official briefed on the discussions said the deal would include 50 hostages taken from Israel, mostly women and children, in exchange for 150 Palestinian prisoners and a pause in the fighting of four or five days. The pause would also allow for humanitarian aid into Gaza.
block-time published-time 12.49am GMT 
 US strikes two "facilities" in Iraq  
The United States on Tuesday carried out strikes against two facilities in Iraq, the US military said. “US Central Command forces conducted discrete, precision strikes against two facilities in Iraq,” a statement from the USmilitary said. “The strikes were in direct response to the attacks against US and Coalition forces by Iran and Iran-backed groups,” the statement added.
These strikes appear to be in addition to the strikes reported a short while ago, which were described as being on “an Iranian-backed militia vehicle and a number of Iranian-backed militia personnel involved in [an attack last night by Iran-backed militias].” 
block-time published-time 12.32am GMT 
Al Jazeera reports that a Palestinian has died, “as a result of being shot by occupation forces in the town of Azzun, east of Qalqilya, in the northern West Bank.”
block-time published-time 12.28am GMT 
 UN seeing 40% increase in diarrhoea cases in last fortnight, warns of child pneumonia risk  
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports in its daily update from Gaza that there has been a 35% increase in skin diseases and a 40% increase in diarrhoea in the last two weeks as a result of “extremely overcrowded conditions” in UNRWA shelters. 
“The poor sanitary conditions, combined with cold rain recently, has exacerbated the risk of epidemics and may lead to a spike in child pneumonia, according to the WHO,” UNOCHA writes. 
block-time published-time 12.21am GMT 
The Times of Israel has this report from the cabinet meeting where the hostage deal is being debated. “Ministers from the ultra-Orthodox Shas party have left the meeting after leaving a note saying they back the agreement,” the Times of Israel reports, and there have been tense exchanges between ministers: 
Several tense exchanges have reportedly occurred during the ongoing cabinet vote on a deal that will see Hamas release some 50 hostages — children, mothers, and women — in exchange for a ceasefire of 4-5 days and the release of 150-300 Palestinian prisoners.
According to leaks reported by Hebrew media, Minister Benny Gantz responds angrily to Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich for expressing concern Hamas will seek to extend the ceasefire. Smotrich and his far-right Religious Zionism party have come out against the agreement.
“Do you trust [Yahya] Sinwar more than us?” Gantz is quoted as saying, referring to the Hamas chief in Gaza who Israel has accused of helping mastermind the October 7 massacres.
In another exchange, Likud ministers Miki Zohar and Gila Gamliel confront National Security Minister Itamar Ben Gvir for holding a faction meeting of his ultranationalist Otzma Yehudit party before the cabinet convened, after announcing he and his faction would vote against the agreement. Gamliel reportedly stresses to Ben Gvir the importance of unity.
“But we are not united,” Ben Gvir says. “This is a decision with generational damage that will come back to hurt us badly.”
Ministers from the ultra-Orthodox Shas party have left the meeting after leaving a note saying they back the agreement.
block-time published-time 12.04am GMT 
 Which hostages have been released since 7 October?  
Hamas has to date released only four hostages: US citizens Judith Raanan, 59, and her daughter, Natalie Raanan, 17, on 20 October, citing “humanitarian reasons,” and Israeli women Nurit Cooper, 79, and Yocheved Lifshitz, 85, on 23 October.
    Natalie Shoshana Raanan (L) and Judith Tai Raanan speaking on the phone with US President Joe Biden, after being held hostage and later released by Hamas.  Photograph: US Embassy in Jerusalem/AFP/Getty Images      Yocheved Lifshitz speaks to the media outside Ichilov Hospital after she was released by Hamas last night, on 24 October 2023 in Tel Aviv, Israel.  Photograph: Alexi J Rosenfeld/Getty Images   
The armed wing of the Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad, which participated in the 7 October raid with Hamas, said late on Tuesday that one of the Israeli hostages it has held since the attacks on Israel had died. “We previously expressed our willingness to release her for humanitarian reasons, but the enemy was stalling and this led to her death,” Al Quds Brigades said on its Telegram channel.
block-time published-time 11.49pm GMT 
 First release of hostages expected on Thursday if deal approved  
Israeli media, including Channel 12 news, report that if the deal is approved, the first release of hostages is expected on Thursday. 
This delay is because if the deal is agreed to, there must be a 24-hour waiting period before it is implemented, to give Israeli citizens the chance to ask the Supreme Court to block the release of Palestinian prisoners, according to reports in Israeli media. 
block-time published-time 11.22pm GMT 
 US strike kills 'several' members of Iran-backed forces in Iraq  
A US warplane killed multiple Iranian-backed militiamen in Iraq after they fired a short-range ballistic missile at American and allied personnel in the country, the Pentagon said Tuesday. 
It is the first time the United States has announced a strike on Iranian proxy forces in Iraq since targeting Tehran-linked sites in Syria on three occasions in recent weeks, in response to a spike in attacks on American personnel.
“We can confirm an attack last night by Iran-backed militias using a close-range ballistic missile against US and coalition forces at Al-Asad Airbase, which resulted in eight injuries and some minor damage to infrastructure,” Pentagon spokesman Brigadier General Pat Ryder said in a statement.
The Ain al-Asad Air Base is located in the desert of Iraq’s Western Anbar province and hosts forces of the US-led coalition fighting the Islamic State (IS) group in Iraq.
“Immediately following the attack, a US military AC-130 aircraft in the area conducted a self-defense strike against an Iranian-backed militia vehicle and a number of Iranian-backed militia personnel involved in this attack. This self-defence strike resulted in several enemy KIA (killed in action),” Ryder said.
block-time published-time 11.14pm GMT 
 Islamic Jihad says an Israeli hostage has died – report  
The armed wing of the Palestinian militant group Islamic Jihad announced late on Tuesday the death of one of the Israeli hostages it has held since the 7 October attacks on Israel. “We previously expressed our willingness to release her for humanitarian reasons, but the enemy was stalling and this led to her death,” Al Quds Brigades said on its Telegram channel.
This report is via Reuters and the claim has not been independently verified by the Guardian.
block-time published-time 11.10pm GMT 
US secretary of state Antony Blinken will visit Israel next week, Axios reports. This is Helen Sullivan taking over the Guardian’s live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war and hostage and temporary ceasefire negotiations. 
block-time published-time 11.00pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 1am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
At least 14,128 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli strikes in Gaza since the war began, according to the government in the territories on Tuesday. The latest death toll update  includes at least 5,600 children and 3,550 women, it said.Benjamin Netanyahu has asked his government to back a deal for the release ofsome of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages held by Hamas. Israel will continue its war  against Hamas even if a temporary ceasefire is reached to release hostages, the Israeli prime minister said at the start of Tuesday night’s meeting. Ismail Haniyeh, the most senior political leader of Hamas, said a truce agreement with Israel was near  and that the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators. Joe Biden has also said a deal was “very close”. A potential deal could result in 50 hostages, all women or children , being freed in exchange for the return of 150 Palestinians in Israeli jails, also all women or children, according to Israeli media reports. The deal would also reportedly result in a pause in hostilities for at least five days; restrictions on Israeli surveillance of Gaza; and additional aid sent into the territory. The Israeli government is expected to have a majority  in the cabinet to approve a hostage deal, despite opposition from the far-right parties. The World Health Organization (WHO) has said it stands in solidarity  with health workers at al-Awda hospital in north Gaza after three doctors and “a patient companion” were reportedly killed in an attack on the facility.  Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) have said two of its doctors and a third health ministry doctor were killed after what it said was a strike  on al-Awda hospital.  The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) said three doctors were killed in what it said was an Israeli strike  on al-Awda, one of the last remaining functional hospitals in northern Gaza.The WHO also confirmed that one of its staff was killed in Gaza on Tuesday alongside her six-month-old baby.Dima Abdullatif Mohammed Alhaj, 29, was a critical part of the WHO’s trauma and emergency team  and had been part of the organisation since 2019, it said. She was killed when her parents’ house in southern Gaza, where she had evacuated from Gaza City, was bombed, the WHO said in a statement. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said he was “devastated”  by the news of her death.The UN has warned that a “tragic … entirely avoidable surge” in child deaths is expected in Gaza, where on average a child is killed every 10 minutes. The UN children’s agency (Unicef) said the number of children dying could skyrocket  due to the serious additional threat of a mass disease outbreak in the besieged Palestinian territory.The Palestinian poet and author Mosab Abu Toha has been released  after he was detained by Israeli forces along with scores of other Palestinian men trying to leave northern Gaza, according to his friends and Israeli officials.At least 52 journalists and media workers have been killed since the Israel-Hamas war began on 7 October, according to  the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). On Tuesday, a Hezbollah-affiliated news channel said two of its journalists were killed by an Israeli airstrike  in the south of Lebanon, near the boundary with Israel.The European Commission has said it will continue to provide financial aid to Palestinians after an investigation found no evidence  that the money was going to Hamas. The EU is the world’s biggest provider of assistance to Palestinians, with almost €1.2bn earmarked for 2021-2024.The Scottish Labour party have formally backed demands for a full ceasefire in Israel’s bombing of Gaza.  Anas Sarwar supported a motion  put forward by Scotland’s first minister, Humza Yousaf, on Tuesday calling for an immediate truce,  widening the Labour party’s divisions  on the conflict.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.10pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.36pm GMT 
 Two prematurely born babies who were being cared for at Gaza’s biggest hospital died before 31 other premature babies were evacuated from the hospital on Sunday, a World Health Organization (WHO) spokesperson said. 
Speaking to reporters in Geneva earlier today, Christian Lindmeier said the two babies had died “because of the lack of care available to them”.
On Sunday, 31 premature babies were evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in north Gaza, and 28 of them were taken to Egypt for urgent treatment on Monday. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said 12 babies had been flown on to Cairo.
All of the evacuated babies were “fighting serious infections”, a WHO spokesperson said at the time.
The mother of one of the three babies who stayed in Gaza told Reuters on Tuesday that she “felt alive again” to have her newborn son, Anas, safely in her care after he was moved to a hospital in southern Gaza. 
Warda Sbeta, 32, was offered the option of being evacuated to Egypt with Anas so he could receive further medical care, but she refused the offer in order to stay with her husband and her seven other children.
Of the other two premature babies rescued from al-Shifa hospital, one was unidentified, according to doctors at the Rafah hospital. They did not give information about the third baby.
    A premature baby, who was evacuated from al Shifa hospital in Gaza City lies in an incubator at a hospital in Rafah, southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Ibraheem Abu Mustafa/Reuters      
block-time published-time 10.08pm GMT 
 The Hollywood talent agency UTA has dropped Susan Sarandon as a client after she spoke at a pro-Palestine rally over the weekend, a spokesperson for the agency confirmed to Deadline.  
The Oscar-winning actor attended several rallies in support of Palestine and drew criticism  for saying:
There are a lot of people afraid of being Jewish at this time, and are getting a taste of what it feels like to be a Muslim in this country.
In remarks captured on video , Sarandon encouraged others to keep speaking up in support of Palestinians in the Israel-Hamas war.
People are questioning, people are standing up, people are educating themselves, people are stepping away from brainwashing that started when they were kids.
     Susan Sarandon speaks at pro-Palestinian rally on 17 November. Photograph: Erik Pendzich/Shutterstock   
Sarandon is the latest public figure to find themselves in hot water over their stance on the war, particularly in support of Palestine.  Last month, Maha Dakhil, the co-head of film at Hollywood powerhouse agency CAA, faced internal backlash and resigned from the agency’s board after she reposted an image on Instagram that read, in part: “You’re currently learning who supports genocide.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.18pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.47pm GMT 
 The World Health Organization (WHO) has confirmed that one of its staff was killed in Gaza on Tuesday alongside her six-month-old baby. 
 Dima Abdullatif Mohammed Alhaj, 29, was a critical part of the WHO’s trauma and emergency team and had been part of the organisation since 2019, it said. She studied at the University of Glasgow as part of the Erasmus exchange programme in 2018-19, it said.
Alhaj was a “wonderful person with a radiant smile, cheerful, positive, respectful”, Rik Peeperkorn, the WHO representative in the occupied Palestinian territory, said.
Her work was crucial, and she had been requested to take on even more responsibilities to support the Gaza suboffice and team. This is a such a painful loss for all of us.
Alhaj was killed when her parents’ house in southern Gaza, where she had evacuated from Gaza City, was bombed, the WHO said in a statement. More than 50 family and community members sheltering in the same house also were reportedly killed. It added:
The death of Dima and her family is another example of the senseless loss in this conflict. Civilians have died in their homes, at their workplaces, while evacuating, while sheltering in schools, while being cared for in hospitals. When will it stop?
enltrWHO staff member killed in Gaza With heavy hearts, @WHO  announces the death of one of our staff in Gaza, in the occupied Palestinian territory. Dima Abdullatif Mohammed Alhaj, 29 years old, had been with WHO since December 2019. She worked as a patient administrator at the Limb… pic.twitter.com/NBwPJxizGf
 — WHO in occupied Palestinian territory (@WHOoPt) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.07pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.32pm GMT 
 Yahya Sinwar, 61, was a founding member of Hamas and has risen to become perhaps its most powerful figure. 
Israeli officials have described him as the architect of the 7 October attacks, which killed 1,200 people, mostly civilians, and so “a dead man walking”. Now he may hold the key to the current negotiations  over the release of the hostages in Gaza.
Born in a refugee camp at the southern end of the Gaza Strip, Sinwar was drawn into Islamist activism when he studied at the Islamic University of Gaza in the early 1980s, as a religious resurgence across the Middle East gathered momentum.
In 1987, he joined the newly created group Hamas, and was made head of its nascent intelligence service. Duties included uncovering spies or other “collaborators” with Israel as well as people in Gaza who infringed Hamas’s strict “morality” codes.
    Yahya Sinwar addresses supporters during a rally in April. Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images   
Arrested in 1988 and sentenced to four life sentences for attempted murder and sabotage, he then spent 23 years in Israeli jails. In prison, Sinwar refused to talk to any Israelis and personally punished those who did, pressing the face of one into a makeshift stove, according to one Israeli former interrogator who worked at the institution where Sinwar was held.
“He’s 1,000% committed and 1,000% violent, a very, very hard man,” said the interrogator.
He is also a sophisticated political operator with a sharp mind. Sinwar used his time in prison to learn Hebrew and study his enemy, gaining knowledge that may be helpful now.
Read the full profile by Jason Burke here.
 Related:  Yahya Sinwar: the man who may hold key to release of Gaza hostages
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.05pm GMT 
 Here’s more from Benjamin Netanyahu, who has been addressing  his cabinet ministers as they prepare to vote for a deal for the release of hostages. 
Speaking after a meeting with his war cabinet and the wider security cabinet, the Israeli prime minister said accepting a deal was “a difficult decision but it’s a right decision”.
Netanyahu said the US president, Joe Biden, had helped “improve the framework being laid out before you... to include more hostages at a lower price”, adding:
The entire security establishment fully supports it.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.46pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.48pm GMT 
 The World Health Organization (WHO) has said it stands in solidarity with health workers at al-Awda hospital in north Gaza after three doctors and “a patient companion” were reportedly killed in an attack on the facility.  
Many other people were reportedly injured, the WHO said in a statement. The hospital also sustained “substantial” damages, it said, adding:
WHO has documented 178 health attacks in the Gaza Strip that have resulted in 553 fatalities and 696 casualties, including 22 fatalities and 48 injuries of health care workers on duty.
Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) earlier today  said it was “horrified” by the killing of two of its doctors and a third doctor following what it said was a strike on al-Awda.
enltr. @WHO  stands in solidarity with health workers at Al Awda Hospital in North Gaza, as well as colleagues at @MSF , and mourns the deaths of three doctors and a patient companion who were reportedly killed in an attack on the hospital today. Reportedly, many were additionally… pic.twitter.com/5Ppmlmy57v
 — WHO in occupied Palestinian territory (@WHOoPt) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.47pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.36pm GMT 
 Qatar is awaiting the result of the Israeli government’s vote on the hostage deal, a foreign ministry spokesperson said. 
 Majid  al-Ansari told CNN that the proposal for a humanitarian pause and the release of hostages was delivered to the Israeli side in the early hours of Tuesday, after weeks of continuous negotiations.
The proposed deal includes the International Committee of the Red Cross visits to hostages from Israel still being held in Gaza, and medical assistance for those who need it, Benjamin Netanyahu has reportedly told his ministers. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.22pm GMT 
 Netanyahu: Israel will continue war 'until we achieve all our goals'  
 Benjamin Netanyahu  has been addressing his ministers during a meeting of the government to discuss the hostage deal.
Israel will continue its war against Hamas even if a temporary ceasefire is reached to release hostages, the Israeli prime minister said in a televised video statement, AP reported.
“We are at war, and we will continue the war,” he said.
We will continue until we achieve all our goals.
The full Israeli cabinet is now meeting to discuss a potential hostage deal, following meetings of the war cabinet and the security cabinet.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.51pm GMT 
 Israel is telling its ministers that the International Committee of the Red Cross will be allowed to visit unreleased hostages in Gaza and provide medical assistance as  part of a possible hostage deal. 
From the UK’s Channel 4 foreign correspondent Paraic O’Brien :
enltrNetanyahu told ministers that Red Cross will be allowed to visit hostages that haven’t been released inside Gaza & give them medication as part of the deal.
— Paraic O'Brien (@paraicobrien) November 21, 2023
Israel’s full 38-minister cabinet is meeting on the possible hostage release deal, following earlier meetings with Israel’s war cabinet and security cabinet.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.20pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.39pm GMT 
 Death toll passes 14,000 Palestinians in Gaza, says Gaza government  
At least 14,128 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza since the war began, according to the government in the occupied territories.
The latest death toll update includes at least 5,600 children and 3,550 women, it said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.25pm GMT 
 Full Israeli cabinet is meeting to discuss possible hostage deal  
Israel’s full 38-minister cabinet is now meeting to discuss the hostage release deal, Israeli media is reporting.
The meeting of the coalition follows a meeting of the war cabinet and the security cabinet. No vote was held in the earlier meetings, Channel 12 in Israel reported.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.15pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 9.15pm in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
Benjamin Netanyahu has been meeting his most senior ministers on Tuesday evening amid strong indications his government is due to approve a deal for the release of some of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages held by Hamas in Gaza. The Israeli prime minister’s office said that “in light of developments in the matter of the release of our hostages” Israel’s war cabinet would be convened  followed by meetings of his wider security cabinet and the full cabinet.Ismail Haniyeh, the most senior political leader of Hamas, said a truce agreement with Israel was near. “ We are close to reaching a deal on a truce ,” Haniyeh said on Tuesday, adding that the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators. Joe Biden has also said a deal was “very close”. A potential deal could result in 50 hostages, all women or children , being freed in exchange for the return of 150 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails, also all women or children, according to Israeli media reports. The deal would also reportedly result in a pause in hostilities for at least five days; restrictions on Israeli surveillance of Gaza; and additional aid sent into the territory. The Israeli government is expected to have a majority  in the cabinet to approve a hostage deal, despite opposition from the far-right parties. Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) have said two of its doctors and a third health ministry doctor have been killed following what it said was a strike  on al-Awda hospital in northern Gaza.  The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) said three doctors were killed in what it said was an Israeli strike  on al-Awda, one of the last remaining functional hospitals in northern Gaza.The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) has said he is “devastated” that a colleague had been killed in Gaza. Dima Alhaj was “tragically killed  alongside her six-month-old baby, her husband and two brothers”, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus posted to social media on Tuesday. A WHO spokesperson said on Tuesday that three hospitals in Gaza had requested help  with evacuating patients and that planning had started.The UN has warned that a “tragic … entirely avoidable surge” in child deaths is expected in Gaza, where on average a child is killed every 10 minutes. The UN children’s agency (Unicef) said the number of children dying could skyrocket  due to the serious additional threat of a mass disease outbreak in the besieged Palestinian territory.The Palestinian poet and author Mosab Abu Tohahas been released  after he was detained by Israeli forces along with scores of other Palestinian men trying to leave northern Gaza, according to his friends and Israeli officials.At least 52 journalists and media workers have been killed since the Israel-Hamas war began on 7 October, according to  the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). On Tuesday, a Hezbollah-affiliated news channel said two of its journalists were killed by an Israeli airstrike  in the south of Lebanon, near the boundary with Israel.The European Commission has said it will continue to provide financial aid to Palestinians after an investigation found no evidence  that the money was going to Hamas. The EU is the world’s biggest provider of assistance to Palestinians, with almost €1.2bn earmarked for 2021-2024.Britain has deployed an extra 1,000 military personnel around the Middle East since Hamas’s deadly 7 October attack on Israel junior defense minister James Heappey said on Monday in a parliamentary answer , revising upwards the deployment to the region.The Scottish Labour party have formally backed demands for a full ceasefire in Israel’s bombardment of Gaza.  Anas Sarwar supported a motion  put forward by Scotland’s first minister, Humza Yousaf, on Tuesday calling for an immediate truce,  widening the Labour party’s divisions  on the conflict.South African lawmakers have voted in favour of closing down the Israeli embassy in South Africaand suspending all diplomatic relations with Israel until it agrees to a ceasefire in Gaza. Meanwhile, the South African president,  Cyril Ramaphosa, accused Israel of war crimes  and “genocide” in Gaza as he chaired an extraordinary summit of the Brics group  on Tuesday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.27pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.45pm GMT 
 The White House has said it is hopeful about a hostage deal and believes that Israel and Hamas are getting closer to an agreement. 
The US national security council spokesperson John Kirby, at a press briefing on Tuesday, said:
We are closer than we’ve been. We believe we’re getting closer.
We won’t say and do not want to say anything in these delicate hours that could put a deal at greater risk.
Earlier today, Joe Biden said a deal is “very close”  to bringing home some of the hostages held in Gaza.
enltr“We’re now very close, very close. You could bring some of the hostages home very soon.... But things are looking good.” — President Biden sounds an optimistic note on the potential for a deal around Hamas releasing 50 Israeli women and children held hostage. pic.twitter.com/9mx8UI2X1w
 — The Recount (@therecount) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.05pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.41pm GMT 
 Hostages to be released in potential deal likely to be mostly children - reports  
The hostages who are expected to be released if a deal is reached will include 30 children, eight mothers and 12 women, Haaretz is reporting.
The hostages who are expected to be released will mostly be children, according to a separate CNN report, citing a source.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.31pm GMT 
 A majority in the cabinet  of the Israeli government will  approve a hostage deal, despite opposition from the far-right parties  Religious Zionist Party and Otzma Yehudit,  the Times of Israel reported.
The war cabinet supports the deal and will rally 19 votes held by Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud party and five votes held by Benny Gantz’s National Unity party, it reported.
The Religious Zionist and Otzma Yehudit together hold six cabinet votes, it writes.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.18pm GMT 
 Protesters have gathered outside the Kirya military base in Tel Aviv as Benjamin Netanyahu met  his most senior ministers amid growing expectations of a deal for the release of some hostages held in Gaza. 
About 200 protesters have gathered alongside the families of hostages, Haaretz reported.
    Families and supporters protest in Tel Aviv to demand the liberation of hostages being held in Gaza. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters      Protesters block a road in Tel Aviv as they demand the return of hostages. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters      A banner demanding that hostages be returned. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.09pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.04pm GMT 
 South African lawmakers have voted in favour of closing down the Israeli embassy in South Africa and suspending all diplomatic relations with Israel until it agrees to a ceasefire in Gaza. 
The vote, which was adopted by a 248-91 margin, is largely symbolic as it will be up to the government whether to implement it.
Meanwhile, South African president,  Cyril Ramaphosa,  accused Israel of war crimes and “genocide” in Gaza as he chaired an extraordinary summit of the Brics group  on Tuesday. Ramaphosa said:
The collective punishment of Palestinian civilians through the unlawful use of force by Israel is a war crime. The deliberate denial of medicine, fuel, food and water to the residents of Gaza is tantamount to genocide.
He called for an “immediate and comprehensive ceasefire” and the deployment of a UN force “to monitor the cessation of hostilities and protect civilians”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.35pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.57pm GMT 
 Scottish Labour has formally backed demands for a full ceasefire in Israel’s bombardment of Gaza, widening the party’s divisions  on the conflict. 
 Anas Sarwar supported a motion  tabled by Scotland’s first minister, Humza Yousaf, in Holyrood on Tuesday calling for an immediate truce, in defiance of Keir Starmer ’s instruction that Labour should only support “pauses” to allow evacuations and aid to arrive.
Sarwar then directly criticised Benjamin Netanyahu ’s refusal to consider the full cessation of military action in Gaza. Sarwar told MSPs he believed the Israeli prime minister “has no interest in peace”, implying he needed to be removed from power for lasting peace to be achieved.
enltrTomorrow @ScottishLabour  will vote for an immediate ceasefire. Here I explain why and what I believe needs to happen to make it a reality. pic.twitter.com/cgiuWy6ljf
 — Anas Sarwar (@AnasSarwar) November 20, 2023
The coalition between Labour and the Scottish National party at Holyrood echoed last week’s revolt in the Commons, when 56 Labour MPs, including eight frontbenchers, broke the party whip  to support an SNP motion at Westminster calling for a ceasefire.
Sarwar has repeatedly urged Starmer to take a far tougher line on Israel’s retaliation after Hamas’s atrocities on 7 October, openly distancing himself from Starmer’s refusal to support UN calls for a full ceasefire. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.50pm GMT 
 The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he is “devastated” that a colleague ha d been killed in Gaza. 
 Dima Alhaj was “tragically killed alongside her six-month-old baby, her husband and two brothers”, he wrote in social media post alongside a photo of Alhaj.
He said multiple other family members were also killed as they sheltered in the same house, adding:
I have no words to describe our grief.
enltrMy colleagues and I are devastated: we have lost one of our own in #Gaza  today. Our young @WHOoPt  colleague Dima Alhaj was tragically killed alongside her 6 month old baby, her husband and 2 brothers. Reportedly multiple other family members sheltering in the same house were… pic.twitter.com/vURpNFRXe6
 — Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (@DrTedros) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.39pm GMT 
 The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) has said three doctors were killed in what it said was an Israeli strike on Al-Awda hospital in northern Gaza. 
 Doctors Without Borders (MSF) has confirmed  that two of its doctors and a third health ministry doctor were killed following what it said was a strike on Al-Awda.
enltr??Update: Three doctors and one injured companion have been martyred, in addition to three medical staff members sustaining critical injuries. https://t.co/2ktHWOE8Jm
 — PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 21, 2023
 ActionAid said it was “horrified” to learn from the hospital, which is a partner to the organisation, that three doctors were killed after the fourth floor of the building was hit by bombing. It added:
While we are still awaiting further information, our position is in no doubt. This bombing of Al-Awda is yet another potential breach of international humanitarian law in a crisis where the rights of patients to access lifesaving care are being violated daily. Healthcare workers, ambulances, and hospitals are never a legitimate target.
In a statement, Al-Awda said that it “adhered to the medical and health principles and practices in times of conflicts and war” and that “only medical personnel, patients and the injured” were inside the hospital.
block-time published-time 5.25pm GMT 
 MSF says its doctors were killed in strike on northern Gaza hospital  
Doctors Without Borders (MSF) has said it is “horrified” by the killing of two of its doctors and a third health ministry doctor following what it said was a strike on Al-Awda hospital in northern Gaza.
The MSF doctors, Dr Mahmoud Abu Nujaila and Dr Ahmad Al Sahar,  were in the hospital when it was hit on the third and fourth floors, the charity said in a statement. Other medical staff, including MSF staff, were severely injured, it said.
More than 200 patients are still in Al-Awda and must be urgently evacuated to other hospitals in Gaza that are still functioning, MSF said.
It said it has regularly shared information about Al-Awda – one of the last remaining functional hospitals in northern Gaza – and that it had shared GPS coordinates with Israeli authorities on Monday. The statement continued:
We condemn this strike in the strongest terms and yet again call for the respect and protection of medical facilities, staff and patients.
Attacks on medical facilities are a “serious violation of international humanitarian law”, it said, adding that such attacks have become “systematic” in the past weeks.
This is yet another incident that MSF staff have been subject to in the last few days. Our colleagues who are assisting hundreds of patients in Gaza are facing extremely difficult times in providing the little medical care they can. Seeing doctors killed next to hospital beds is beyond tragic, and this must stop now.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.21pm GMT 
     A medic in Khan Younis attends to an injured Palestinian child evacuated from the Indonesian hospital in the north. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images      Relatives of Palestinians who died in Israeli attacks mourn as the bodies are taken from the morgue of al-Aqsa Martyr’s hospital. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.13pm GMT 
 Israel’s Religious Zionist Party, led by finance minister Bezalel Smotrich, has said it cannot agree to a proposed deal for the release of some of the hostages held in Gaza. 
In a statement, the party described the deal as “bad for Israel’s security, bad for the hostages, and bad for the soldiers of the IDF”, the Times of Israel reported.
It said the deal will “abandon” some of the hostages for an uknown period of time, “raise the price” for their release, and give Hamas the opportunity to reorganise.
The only way to return all the hostages “is by continuing the unceasing military pressure on Hamas until total victory”, it said, adding:
Religious Zionism will stand strong for the continuing of the war until the total destruction of Hamas, the return of all the hostages, and the elimination of the threat posed by Gaza to Israeli citizens.
block-time published-time 4.57pm GMT 
 UN warns of 'tragic, avoidable surge' in child deaths in Gaza  
The UN has warned that a “tragic … entirely avoidable surge” in child deaths is expected in Gaza, where on average a child is killed every 10 minutes.
 “About 160 children are killed every day; that’s one every 10 minutes,” said World Health Organization (WHO)  spokesperson Christian Lindmeier on Tuesday.
Speaking to journalists in Geneva, he said that “every 10 minutes, two children are injured” and that children and families have been dying “in terrifying circumstances”.
The UN children’s agency (Unicef) warned that number could skyrocket due to the serious additional threat of a mass disease outbreak in the besieged Palestinian territory. The Unicef spokesperson James Elder said:
If youngsters continue to have restricted access to water and sanitation in Gaza, we will see a tragic yet entirely avoidable surge in the number of children dying.
“The death toll among children is sickening,” he said, noting that more than 5,350 Palestinian children had reportedly been killed, according to Gaza health authorities.
Grief is becoming embedded in Gaza. So this then is a stark warning: without sufficient fuel, without sufficient water, conditions for children will plummet.
He said the daily minimum need in emergency situations was 15 litres of water per person, but that in parts of Gaza as little as three litres a day is available, and none on some days.
Pointing to “a desperate lack of water, faecal matter strewn across densely populated settlements [and] an unacceptable lack of latrines”, Elder said it was a “perfect storm for the spread of disease”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.41pm GMT 
 At least 52 journalists and media workers have been killed since the Israel-Hamas war began on 7 October, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ). 
The press group updated its death toll  after the news that two journalists  from the Hezbollah-affiliated Lebanese channel Al Mayadeen were reportedly killed while working in southern Lebanon on Tuesday.
The toll now includes 46 Palestinians, four Israelis and three Lebanese killed since 7 October, as well as 11 journalists injured and three missing journalists.
Sherif Mansour, CPJ’s Middle East and North Africa programme coordinator, said:
Journalists across the region are making great sacrifices to cover this heart-breaking conflict. Those in Gaza, in particular, have paid, and continue to pay, an unprecedented toll and face exponential threats. Many have lost colleagues, families, and media facilities, and have fled seeking safety when there is no safe haven or exit.
block-time published-time 4.30pm GMT 
 Biden says 'very close' to hostage deal  
The US president, Joe Biden, has said a deal is “very close” to securing the release of potentially dozens of hostages held by Hamas.
Speaking to reporters at the White House on Tuesday, Biden said:
We’re now very close, very close – we can bring some of these hostages home very soon, but don’t want to get into the details of things.
He added:
Nothing is done until it’s done and when we have more to say we will, but things are looking good at the moment.
Meanwhile, a US official told Reuters that Israel and Hamas were “very, very close” to agreeing a deal.
The deal would include Hamas releasing 50 hostages, mostly women and children, in exchange for 150 Palestinian prisoners and a pause of four or five days, the official said.
We believe we are very, very close to having a deal. There is still a lot of work to be done, still approval that has to be achieved. But we believe we are very close.
It comes as Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has convened his war cabinet  amid growing signs of an imminent deal on the release of hostages.
Netanyahu is expected to then meet his security cabinet at 7pm local time (5pm GMT) and the full government at 8pm (6pm GMT).
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.20pm GMT 
     Injured Palestinians, including children, are being taken to Al-Aqsa Martyrs Hospital for treatment after the Israeli attacks hit the school at Al Bureij Refugee Camp as Israeli attacks continue in Deir Al Balah, Gaza. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images      A picture taken from a position near Sderot along the Israeli border with the Gaza Strip shows smoke billowing during an Israeli bombardment. Photograph: Fadel Senna/AFP/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.15pm GMT 
 EU approves continued Palestinian development aid  
The European Commission has said it will continue to provide financial aid to the Palestinians after an investigation found no evidence that the money was going to Hamas.
On 9 October, after the Hamas terror attack on Israel, the EU’s executive branch announced a review of the use of hundreds of millions of euros in development assistance meant to help the Palestinians fight poverty.
The European Commission executive vice-president, Valdis Dombrovskis,  at a press briefing in Strasbourg today, said:
The review found no indications of EU money having directly, or indirectly, benefited the terrorist organisation Hamas.
The EU is the world’s biggest provider of assistance to the Palestinians. Almost €1.2bn is earmarked for 2021-2024.
In a statement,  the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, said the review was “necessary” and that it has “confirmed that the safeguards in place are effective”, adding:
Work is now ongoing on the design of our future support to the Palestinians in view of the changing and still evolving situation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.57pm GMT 
 A celebrated Palestinian poet and author, Mosab Abu Toha, has reportedly been released after he was arrested by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and taken into questioning. 
Abu Toha was detained on Monday  by Israeli forces while trying to leave Gaza, according to his friends and family.
He had been told by US officials that he and his family would be able to cross into Egypt, as one of his children is an American citizen. They were on the way from north to south Gaza, heading for the Rafah crossing point on Sunday, when he was rounded up along with other Palestinian men at an Israeli military checkpoint and taken away.
Abu Toha had been writing in the New Yorker magazine about his experiences under bombardment in Jabalia refugee camp in northern Gaza.
The newyorker.com’s editor Michael Luo said Abu Toha had now been released and reunited with his family in central Gaza.
enltrSome promising news: Just spoke to editor David Remnick, who told me that, according to two Israeli military officials, the poet Mosab Abu Toha, who lives with his family in Gaza, has been released.
— Michael Luo (@michaelluo) November 21, 2023
enltrNew update from Remnick: Mosab is back in central Gaza and reunited with his family.
— Michael Luo (@michaelluo) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.49pm GMT 
 More than 1,800 writers and publishers have signed an open letter  in support of the pro-Palestine protesters who disrupted the ceremony of a prestigious Canadian literary award last week. 
Among the signatories is the Canadian author Sarah Bernstein, the winner of the C$100,000 (£58,000) Scotiabank Giller prize.
The Giller prize event was first interrupted when protesters jumped onstage with signs that read “Scotiabank funds genocide”, while another protester shouted that Scotiabank “currently has a $500m [£398.7m] stake in Elbit Systems” and that “Elbit Systems is supplying the Israeli military’s genocide against the Palestinian people”.
    Protesters removed by police after interrupting the Scotiabank Giller prize ceremony. Photograph: Chris Young/AP   
The event was interrupted a second time when the winner’s announcement was being made. As Bernstein’s name was called, a protester posing as a photographer began shouting, so the organisers repeated the announcement.
The letter states that protesters were booed by the audience, forcibly removed, detained by police for three hours after the event ended and are now facing charges, which it says should be dropped.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.38pm GMT 
 We reported earlier  that a Lebanese news channel said two of its journalists were killed by an Israeli airstrike in the south of Lebanon, near the UN-marked boundary with Israel. 
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) has said it is reviewing the incident. In a statement, the IDF said:
We are aware of a claim regarding journalists in the area who were killed as a result of IDF fire.
This is an area with active hostilities, where exchanges of fire occur. Presence in the area is dangerous. The incident is under review.
The Al-Mayadeen news channel earlier accused Israel of a direct attack on its journalists, a correspondent, Farah Omar, and cameraman Rabih Maamari, who were reporting on military activity along the border with Israel.
A third civilian was killed along with the two journalists, according to the broadcaster’s director Ghassan bin Jiddo, who said it was “a direct attack, it was not by chance”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.27pm GMT 
 China’s president, Xi Jinping, has called for the convening of an “international peace conference” to resolve the Israel-Hamas conflict, as he urged the release of “civilian detainees” and an immediate ceasefire in Gaza. 
Xi, addressing a virtual summit of fellow Brics (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) leaders on Tuesday, was quoted by the state-run Xinhua news agency as saying:
All parties in the conflicts should immediately cease fire and hostilities, stop all violence and attacks targeting civilians, and release civilian detainees to avoid more loss of lives and suffering.
He said there could be no “sustainable peace and security” in the Middle East “without a just solution to the question of Palestine”, adding that China has been “working actively to promote peace talks and a ceasefire”.
Beijing “calls for an early convening of an international peace conference” to “work toward an early solution to the question of Palestine that is comprehensive, just and sustainable”, he said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.49pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.56pm GMT 
Patrick Wintour is the Guardian’s diplomatic editor:
 A revolt by leaders of the global south against US support for Israel’s bombardment of Gaza is brewing as Arab diplomats met their counterparts in China and Moscow, while South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphosa convened a virtual meeting of the leaders of the Brics countries to condemn Israel. 
The Biden administration has been repeatedly warned, including by its own diplomats, that it risks serious loss of support among global south nations that accuse the US of displaying double standards by condemning Russian war crimes in Ukraine, yet remaining largely silent over Israel’s actions in Gaza.
The Brics group consists of Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, and new Brics entrants whose full membership commences next year, including Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Ethiopia, Iran and the United Arab Emirates, were also invited. South Africa has already cut off diplomatic ties with Israel.
The Arab diplomats have been on a tour of capitals of permanent members of the UN security council to gather support for a further UN security council resolution instructing Israel to stop preventing humanitarian aid reaching Gaza. It may also ask for the security council to upgrade the call made on Israel to implement a humanitarian pause to an instruction. Israel immediately rejected a UN security council last week to introduce humanitarian pauses.
The delegation started their tour in China before heading to Russia on Tuesday in a sign that the Arab countries now realise they will have to demonstrate to the US president Joe Biden he cannot take an Arab-US alliance for granted if he continues to provide such strong support to Israel.
It is also expected that some members of the delegation will visit France and the UK. The Qatar prime minister Mohammed bin Abdulraham bin Jassim Al Thani had announced he is due to visit Moscow and London this week.
An Egyptian foreign ministry spokesperson said the diplomats had “drafted a new resolution to be submitted to the security council by the Arab and Islamic groups; to deal with existing obstacles and imbalances of humanitarian aid entry to Gaza.
block-time published-time 2.46pm GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    A man stands next to a tent as workers set up a Jordanian field hospital in Khan Younis, southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Reuters      A picture taken from kibbutz HaGoshrim in northern Israel shows rockets being fired from Lebanon being intercepted by Israel’s Iron Dome missile defence system. Photograph: Jalaa Marey/AFP/Getty Images      Palestinian protesters hurl rocks at Israeli army vehicles after a raid in the Balata refugee camp, east of Nablus city in the occupied West Bank. Photograph: Zain Jaafar/AFP/Getty Images      Palestinian school children move along a damaged street after an Isareli army operation at Balta refugee camp, near Nablus in the occupied West Bank. Photograph: Alaa Badarneh/EPA      Israelis in Tel Aviv prepare an art installation of teddy bears with pictures of hostages being held by Hamas inside Gaza. Photograph: Amir Cohen/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.59pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.26pm GMT 
 Britain has deployed 1,000 extra troops in Middle East since 7 October  
Dan Sabbagh is the Guardian’s defence and security editor:
 Britain has deployed an extra 1,000 military personnel around the Middle East  since Hamas’s deadly 7 October attack on Israel, junior defence minister James Heappey said on Monday in a parliamentary answer, revising upwards the deployment to the region.  
The figure is notably higher than the 600 mentioned by Grant Shapps, the defence secretary, to British MPs yesterday, but it is understood that he was incorrectly referring to an older figure that also did not fully include the UK’s naval commitment.
Responding to a question from opposition Labour’s shadow defence secretary John Healey, Shapps also confirmed that UK forces personnel “have been moved to Tel Aviv” in Israel as well as Beirut and Jordan to help protect British military and civilians in the region.
Defence sources indicated on Tuesday these were British officers to provide liaison with the Israeli Defense Force, and to draw up emergency evacuation and other plans in event of a wider war involving Hezbollah and possibly Iran – but not combat-ready soldiers providing force protection.
Healey asked on Monday whether the government was right to continue to pursue planned cuts to the size of the British army to 73,000, given the Israel-Hamas war, but Shapps said the UK could manage the extra deployment and more if needed. “I am satisfied that we cut our cloth in order to react to events around the world,” the defence secretary said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.58pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.15pm GMT 
 Netanyahu announces series of government meetings tonight 'in light of developments' on hostage releases  
 Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s office has announced a series of government meetings tonight “in light of developments on the issue of the release of our hostages”. 
The war cabinet will meet at 6pm (4pm GMT), the security cabinet at 7pm (5pm GMT) and the full government at 8pm (6pm GMT).
enltrPrime Minister's Office Announcement: In light of developments on the issue of the release of our hostages, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu will, this evening, convene the War Cabinet at 18:00, the Security Cabinet at 19:00, and the Government at 20:00.
— Prime Minister of Israel (@IsraeliPM) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 2.12pm GMT 
Emine Sinmaz reports from Shefayim for the Guardian on Israelis displaced from their homes by the 7 October Hamas attack:
Yali Shamriz was celebrating her second birthday when Hamas gunmen arrived at the kibbutz where she lived and opened fire.
For 22 hours, she sheltered with her father, Jonathan, 33, and mother, Natali, 31, in the safe room at their home while the attackers murdered 63 of the kibbutz’s 700 residents and kidnapped 19 others, including Jonathan’s brother, Alon, 26.
When the family was finally evacuated from Kfar Aza, they left with just the clothes on their backs and a handful of belongings. They are now among the 126,000 displaced Israelis living in hotels across the country in the wake of the 7 October attacks.
“It’s horrible. It’s a nightmare,” Jonathan Shamriz said. “We still don’t fully understand what happened. We still haven’t fully grieved for everyone.
“My best friends are dead, my brother is kidnapped, and when you walk through the kibbutz, it’s no place to return to.”
Displaced Israelis are now residing in 280 guest houses and hotels across the country, including in the Red Sea resort of Eilat, according to the Israeli defence ministry.
It added that as well as those in Gaza border communities, it had evacuated 23,000 people from the northern city of Kiryat Shmona and 38,000 from areas nearby. The ministry said a further 49,000 people were moved as part of a “revitalisation programme” for those affected by the war.
In Gaza, two-thirds of the population of 2.3 million have been displaced to the south, according to the United Nations, and the death toll from Israeli bombardment has reached 13,000, including 5,500 children, according to the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry.
 Read more of Emine Sinmaz’s report here: ‘I’ll never go back’: the Israelis displaced from homes by Hamas attack
 Related:  ‘I’ll never go back’: the Israelis displaced from homes by Hamas attack
block-time published-time 2.09pm GMT 
 Chinese President Xi Jinping on Tuesday urged all parties in the Gaza conflict to immediately cease fire, end all attacks against civilians and release civilian detainees to avoid more loss of lives and suffering, according to Chinese state media. 
It is also important to ensure the safe and smooth passage of humanitarian relief, expand humanitarian aid to people in Gaza, and stop the forced relocation and the cut-off of water, electricity and oil that targets people in Gaza, Reuters reported it quoted Xi saying at a virtual Brics leaders summit. The meeting was also attended by his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin.
block-time published-time 2.01pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It has just gone 4pm in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the latest headlines:
Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, said today progress was being made on the release of hostages held by Hamas in the Gaza Strip.  “We are making progress. I don’t think it’s worth saying too much, not at even this moment, but I hope there will be good news soon,” he told reservists, according to a statement from his office.Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said this Tuesday morning: “We are close to reaching a deal on a truce”. Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson Majed Al-Ansari said “we are at the closest point we ever had been in reaching an agreement”, adding that negotiations were at a “critical and final stage”.It is reported that the deal would involve a multi-day pause in hostilities, the release of about 50 civilian hostages by Hamas and the release of Palestinian women and children held in Israeli custody.  Any agreement would mark the biggest hostage release and first prisoner swap since the 7 October Hamas attack inside Israel. To date just four of the estimated 240 people seized and abducted into Gaza have been returned to Israel. Israeli national security minister Itamar Ben-Gvir issued a statement this morning warning against a deal.Israel’s air force has said on social media that in the last 24 hours it has “struck approximately 250 Hamas terror targets”.  The Israeli military also issued a video of its troops in action within the Gaza Strip, claiming that “division 162 completed the encirclement of Jabalia tonight and is ready for the continuation of the attack”.The Al-Mayadeen news channel has accused Israel of a direct attack on its journalists, after correspondent Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih Maamari were killed on Tuesday while working in the south of Lebanon, near the UN-marked boundary with Israel.  “It was a direct attack, it was not by chance,” AFP reports Bin Jiddo said in an interview on the channel, noting it came after an Israeli government decision this month to block access to the website of Al-Mayadeen. Hezbollah said in a statement that the attack and others on civilians in Lebanon “will not pass without a response”.A World Health Organization spokesperson said on Tuesday that three hospitals in Gaza had requested help with evacuating patients and that planning had started.Unicef, the UN children’s agency, has said there is a serious threat of a mass disease outbreak in besieged Gaza.  “It’s a perfect storm for tragedy,” Unicef spokesperson James Elder said. “We have a desperate lack of water, faecal matter strewn across densely populated settlements, an unacceptable lack of latrines, and severe, severe restraints on hand-washing, personal hygiene and cleaning.”Avi Shoshan has left his position as spokesperson for Tel Aviv’s Ichilov Medical Centre. He was responsible for organising the press conference that presented exchanged hostage 85-year-old Yocheved Lifshitz to the media after her 16 days as a hostage in Gaza. The interview was criticised in Israel as a PR victory for Hamas, after Lifshitz described what she said was “care” and “gentleness” from her captors after the initial violence of being abducted by Hamas, and criticised the Israeli government and military.In Germany, authorities on Tuesday raided the homes of 17 people in the state of Bavaria accused of spreading antisemitic hate speech and threats targeting Jews online.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.10pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.53pm GMT 
 Vladimir Putin has called for a ceasefire in Gaza and international efforts to de-escalate the situation. The Russian president was speaking in Moscow while attending an online summit of the Brics group.  
Russian state-owned news agency Tass quoted Putin saying:
Russia’s position is consistent and non-opportunistic. We call for the joint efforts of the international community aimed at de-escalating the situation, a ceasefire and finding a political solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
He spoke of a human catastrope in Gaza, with Tass quoting him as saying: “The death of thousands of people, the mass expulsion of civilians and the humanitarian catastrophe that has erupted cause deep concern.”
Tass reports Putin drew attention to the fact that children also died during the conflict, quoting him saying: “This is terrible. When you watch how operations are performed on children without anesthesia, it certainly evokes strong emotions.”
In March 2023 the international criminal court inThe Hague issued an arrest warrent for Putin for overseeing the abduction of Ukrainian children.  In granting the request for warrants by the ICC prosecutor, a panel of judges agreed that there were “reasonable grounds” to believe Putin and his children’s rights commissioner, Maria Alekseyevna Lvova-Belova, bore responsibility for the “unlawful deportation” of Ukrainian children.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.39pm GMT 
 Benjamin Netanyahu said  today progress was being made on the release of hostages held by Hamas in the Gaza Strip. 
“We are making progress. I don’t think it’s worth saying too much, not at even this moment, but I hope there will be good news soon,” Reuters reports the Israeli prime minister told reservists, according to a statement from his office.
The Times of Israel earlier reported Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson Majed Al-Ansari as saying “we are at the closest point we ever had been in reaching an agreement,” adding that negotiations were at a “critical and final stage”.
Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said this morning: “We are close to reaching a deal on a truce [with Israel]”, adding that the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators.
It is reported that the deal would involve a multi-day pause in hostilities, the release of about 50 civilian hostages by Hamas and the release of Palestinian women and children held in Israeli custody.
Any agreement would mark the biggest hostage release and first prisoner swap since the 7 October Hamas attack inside Israel. To date, just four of the estimated 240 people seized and abducted into Gaza have been returned to Israel. 
Before the war, Israel was holding about 5,200 Palestinians in custody, and since 7 October there have been more than 2,900 further arrests. Human rights and monitoring groups believe Israel is holding at least 95 women, 37 journalists and 145 children among them.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.21pm GMT 
 The Palestine football team were due to be playing their first home game since 2019 in Ramallah in the occupied West Bank. Because of the war, it has been moved to Kuwait. They face Australia  in a qualifying match for the 2026 World Cup. 
Fans attending the match are expected to stage protests against Israel’s actions in the Gaza Strip. Earlier, Al Jazeera reported that: “At seven minutes into the match, fans will raise Palestinian flags and wave keffiyehs to mark the start of the war on 7 October [the date of the Hamas attack inside Israel  ]. Thirteen minutes into the match, fans will stand and turn their backs on the pitch to protest the killing of more than 13,000 people since the start of the attacks. On 75 minutes, fans will raise their arms and join hands in protest against 75 years of occupation.”
It also reported that at another signal, fans will be raising keys during the match, to “symbolise those taken by the Palestinians when they locked their doors and fled during the Nakba”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.37pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.58pm GMT 
 The  Al-Mayadeen  news channel has accused Israel of a direct attack on its journalists, after correspondent  Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih Maamari  were killed on Tuesday while working in the south of Lebanon, near the UN-marked boundary with Israel. 
Al-Mayadeen director Ghassan bin Jiddo said a third civilian killed with the two journalists was a “contributor” to the channel. “It was a direct attack, it was not by chance,” AFP reports Bin Jiddo said in an interview on the channel, noting it came after an Israeli government decision this month to block access to the website of Al-Mayadeen.
Elsewhere in south Lebanon, the state-run National News Agency said “enemy aircraft raided inhabited houses in Kfar Kila, leading to the death of citizen Laiqa Sarhan, 80, and the wounding of her granddaughter,” whom it identified as a Syrian national.
AFP reports that, speaking on condition of anonymity, a source in a local hospital told it the seven-year-old granddaughter was in a serious condition.
Hezbollah said in a statement that the attack and others on civilians in Lebanon “will not pass without a response”. The Israeli military said it was “looking into the details” of the incident.
Since the cross-border exchanges began after the Hamas attack in southern Israel on 7 October, at least 95 people have been killed on the Lebanese side in the north. According to an AFP tally, most of them were Hezbollah combatants but the number includes at least 14 civilians, three of them journalists.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.52pm GMT 
 Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov on Tuesday hosted counterparts from the Arab League and the Organi sation of Islamic  Cooperation to discuss the Israel-Hamas war. 
Speaking at the start of the talks in Moscow, AP reports Lavrov said Russia condemns any form of terrorism, but added that “terrorism must be fought using methods that don’t amount to collective punishment and don’t contradict, or to put it bluntly, rudely violate the norms of international humanitarian law”.
Lavrov also stressed the need to engage the countries of the region in the search for a long-term Israeli-Palestinian settlement, adding that they “understand better than anyone else how to reach a solution that will satisfy everyone”.
The group – made up of representatives of Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Indonesia, Nigeria, Qatar, Jordan and the Palestinian territories – has already visited China and travels to London and Paris on Wednesday.
Since 24 February 2022, which marked the start of Russia’s full scale invasion of Ukraine, the UN has recorded 27,149 civilian casualties in Ukraine, including more than 9,600 people killed.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.45pm GMT 
 The Times of Israel reports that  Avi Shoshan  has left his position as spokesperson for Tel Aviv’s Ichilov Medical Centre. He was responsible for organising the press conference that presented exchanged hostage 85-year-old Yocheved Lifshitz to the media after her 16 days as a hostage in Gaza. 
The chaotic press conference sparked controversy in Israel, after Lifshitz described what she said was “care” and “gentleness” from her captors after the initial violence of being abducted by Hamas.
Describing the events of 7 October, Lifshitz said “They killed and kidnapped both old and young with no distinction,” adding that she was tied to a motorcycle and driven to Gaza.
“As we rode, the motorcycle rider hit me with a wooden pole. They didn’t break my ribs, but it hurt me a lot in that area, making it difficult to breathe. They stole my watch and jewellery,” she said.
Later on though she described being held underground, but with a doctor visiting daily and providing medication and treatment, and said the captors were “very concerned with hygiene … we had toilets which they cleaned every day”.
The Times of Israel reports:
Lifshitz criticised Israeli failures and spoke well of her captors. The event was considered a propaganda win for Hamas. The 24 October press conference in the hospital lobby appeared to be hastily put together and disorganised. Some criticised the government for failing to oversee the event, and the hospital was blamed by others for arranging it.
Shoshan, who had acted as the medical centre’s spokesperson for 13 years, announced his departure on social media.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.33pm GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from the Israel-Hamas conflict.
    Palestinians walk at the site of Israeli strikes on houses in Jabalia refugee camp in the northern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Reuters      A woman prepares to write a message on an Israel flag in front of a building damaged during the 7 October Hamas attack at kibbutz Kfar Aza in southern Israel. Photograph: James Oatway/Reuters      Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, hosts a meeting about Gaza with foreign ministers from members of the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic cooperation in Moscow. Photograph: Evgenia Novozhenina/Reuters      Israeli soldiers carry a stretcher toward a helicopter near the border with Gaza Strip, as seen from southern Israel. Photograph: Léo Corrêa/AP      Palestinians gather in front of a building hit by an Israeli airstrike in Nuseirat refugee camp, central Gaza Strip. Photograph: Adel Hana/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.28pm GMT 
 The Lebanese prime minister has reportedly condemned the Israeli attack that has killed two journalists in southern Lebanon. 
Najib Mikati is quoted by local media as saying: “This attack proves once again that there are no limits to Israeli crime, and that its goal is to silence the media that exposes its crimes and attacks.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.57pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.20pm GMT 
Erum Salam reports for the Guardian from New York:
US officials say they have helped some 800 US citizens leave Gaza. But more than 1,200 people with ties to the US – including citizens, green card-holders and their families – remain trapped in the embattled territory.
The Abushaabans had left Texas for Gaza in August, excited to catch up with relatives. But what was supposed to be a joyful holiday, became a waking nightmare.
When Israeli military officials issued a sweeping evacuation order for nearly half of Gaza’s 2.3 million people to move south or else risk being killed, the Abushaabans initially sought shelter at the Khan Younis refugee camp.
But as the siege continued, conditions became increasingly grim. Food, water and electricity became scarce and all the while Israel was still bombing Gaza from the land, sea and air.
The Abushaabans’ only connection to the outside world was via WhatsApp – and only when there was limited access to the internet. The communication blackouts in the territory meant they had to decide each day whether to call Kari to discuss their attempts to escape, or dial their family, knowing that any conversation might be their last.
 Read more of Erum Salam’s report here: ‘Why can’t I get them out?’: Palestinian Americans who fled Gaza devastated over leaving family behind
 Related:  ‘Why can’t I get them out?’: Palestinian Americans who fled Gaza devastated over leaving family behind
block-time published-time 12.16pm GMT 
 Reuters has a quick snap that Lebanese media is reporting an Israeli strike on a car inside Lebanon, near Tyre, has killed four people. 
Earlier Lebanon’s Al-Mayadeen television said two of its staff were killed in an Israeli attack in the south of the country today. It named them as correspondent Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih Maamari. The network has accused Israel of deliberately targeting its journalists.
enltr"Israel" deliberately targeted #AlMayadeen  's correspondent, Farah Omar, and cameraman Rabih Me'mari, killing them both after they had just ended their live broadcast from South #Lebanon.  pic.twitter.com/EOvyiRkiM9
 — Al Mayadeen English (@MayadeenEnglish) November 21, 2023
More details soon …
block-time published-time 12.11pm GMT 
 There has been very little official comment from Israel on the prospect of a deal with Hamas over the release of hostages.  The prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has frequently insisted there could be no ceasefire until all the hostages were released, and earlier today national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, cautioned against a deal. 
However, Reuters notes that Israel’s Channel 12 television quoted an unidentified senior government source earlier today saying “they are close” but gave no further details.
Any agreement would mark the biggest hostage release and first prisoner swap since the latest war began on 7 October. Hamas is thought to have taken about 240 hostages during its attack inside Israel, which Israeli authorities claim killed 1,200 people. Four hostages have been released so far, with some people initially thought to have been held, including Noa Marciano and Shani Louk, later declared killed.
Earlier Al Jazeera presented statistics on Palestinians held in Israeli jails, reporting that before 7 October, there were about 5,200 Palestinians held, and there have been at least 2,960 arrested since then. It reports that among those being held by Israel are “at least 95 women and 37 journalists” and “at least 145 of them are children, according to rights and monitoring groups”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.59pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.44am GMT 
 Qatar foreign ministry: negotiations for hostages at 'critical and final stage'  
 Qatar has said that negotiations to free hostages seized by Hamas during the 7 October attack are at a “critical and final stage”. 
The Times of Isreal reported Qatar foreign ministry spokesperson Majed Al-Ansari saying “we are at the closest point we ever had been in reaching an agreement”, adding that negotiations were at a “critical and final stage”.
It is reported that the deal would involve a multi-day pause in hostilities, the release of about 50 civilian hostages by Hamas and the release of Palestinian women and children held in Israeli custody, according to a source who briefed Reuters.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.59pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.23am GMT 
 A World Health Organization spokesperson said on Tuesday that three hospitals in Israeli-besieged Gaza had requested help with evacuating patients and that planning had started. 
Reuters reports that Christian Lindmeier said in Geneva that evacuations were a last resort, and that the situation in Gaza was “robbing the entire population of the north of the means to seek health”.
He said the three hospitals were the al-Shifa, the Indonesian hospital, and al-Ahli hospital, adding “so far it’s only in planning stages with no further details”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.12am GMT 
 Unicef: 'perfect storm for tragedy' in Gaza amid warning on serious threat of mass disease outbreak  
 Unicef, the UN children’s agency, has said there is a serious threat of a mass disease outbreak in besieged Gaza. 
“It’s a perfect storm for tragedy,” Unicef spokesperson James Elder said. “Without enough fuel, we will see the collapse of sanitation services. So we have then, on top of the mortars and the bombs, a perfect storm for the spread of disease.”
“We have a desperate lack of water, faecal matter strewn across densely populated settlements, an unacceptable lack of latrines, and severe, severe restraints on hand-washing, personal hygiene and cleaning.”
Speaking in Geneva via videolink from Cairo, Elder said the potential for wider loss of life in Gaza was being significantly exacerbated because an estimated 800,000 children are displaced from their homes.
“If children’s access to water and sanitation in Gaza continues to be restricted and insufficient, we will see a tragic yet entirely avoidable surge in the number of children dying,” AFP reports Elder said.
“It’s also important to note it’s starting to rain in Gaza. Now combined, children face a serious threat of mass disease outbreak. This, of course, would be lethal.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.16am GMT
block-time published-time 10.49am GMT 
A protest to highlight the number of children killed in Gaza since Israel began its military campaign has been taking place in Istanbul, Turkey. Childrens’ shoes and the photographs of victims of Israeli airstrikes have been left in Üsküdar Square. Health officials in Gaza have claimed that at least 5,000 children have been killed by the assault so far.
    A view of the shoes and pictures of children left in Istanbul. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images   
At the same time the Times of Israel reports that another protest is taking place in Tel Aviv, where Hadas Calderon, the mother of two children abducted by Hamas on 7 October, is protesting outside the IDF headquarters in Israel’s capital.
“We must not miss this chance for a deal,” she told reporters. “I call on all the mothers to come to the entrance to the Kirya [the name of the IDF HQ], and to stand alongside me. We must bring them home.”
Her children Erez, 12, and Sahar, 16 are believed to be in Gaza, among the 30 teenagers and young children thought to have been kidnapped.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.38am GMT 
 Lebanon’s  Al-Mayadeen  television says two of its staff were killed in an Israeli attack in the south of the country today. It named them as correspondent  Farah Omar and cameraman Rabih Maamari. 
The state-run national news agency in Lebanon has also reported “the death of three citizens – two journalists and another civilian – in enemy bombing” which it said occurred in the Tayr Harfa area, which is close to the UN-drawn blue line that marks the boundary between Israel and Lebanon.
Earlier today the IDF said it had been exchanging fire with anti-Israeli forces in Lebanon.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.32am GMT 
Tareq Abu Azzoum, reporting for Al Jazeera from Khan Younis in Gaza, has told the network: “In the last hour, new airstrikes targeted a residential building in the Nuseirat refugee camp, where several Palestinians were wounded. The same camp was targeted this morning in an attack that killed 20 Palestinians. In the north, attacks continued in the vicinity of the Indonesian hospital and Kamal Adwan hospital.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.34am GMT
block-time published-time 10.28am GMT 
 Israel is again telling residents in northern Gaza to move to the south of the territory, saying that it is opening up a corridor via the Salah Al-Din Road until 4pm local time (2pm GMT). 
The Israeli military Arabic spokesperson has also said that “a temporary tactical suspension of military activities” will operate until 2pm local time (noon GMT) in the Tal al-Sultan neighbourhood area, west of Rafah.
arrtl #????  ?? ???? ???? ????? ???? ???? ??????: ?? ??? ???? ????? ?????? ?????? ?????? ????????? ????? ??? ????? ????? ????? ????? ???? ???? ?????? ??? ??????? ???? ??? ???? ???? ????? ??? ?????? ??????? (16:00) ???? ?????? ??? ???? ???? ??? ???????? ?????????. ????? ??? ??????? ????… pic.twitter.com/4KmemWROi8
 — ?????? ????? (@AvichayAdraee) November 21, 2023
UN agencies estimate that 1.7 million Palestinians have fled their homes since Israel began its campaign against Hamas on 7 October. A small number of foreign nationals have been able to exit Gaza via the Rafah border crossing with Egypt, but the vast majority remain internally displaced while the entire Gaza Strip is bombarded by Israel’s air force and resources are blockaded.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.34am GMT
block-time published-time 10.19am GMT 
 German authorities on Tuesday raided the homes of 17 people in the state of Bavaria accused of spreading antisemitic hate speech and threats targeting Jews online. 
According to the Bavarian criminal police, the suspects were 15 men and two women, aged between 18 and 62, German news agency dpa reported. Police questioned the suspects and confiscated evidence from their homes, including mobile phones and laptops, the agency said.
The suspects were said to have celebrated the attacks by Hamas on Israel on 7 October, and were accused of spreading hate speech against Jewish people on social media, using symbols of banned terrorist organisations, AP reports.
The police operation focused on Bavaria’s capital city of Munich.
“Unfortunately, antisemitism has an impact on the daily life of many Jews in Germany,” Michael Weinzierl, the Bavarian police commissioner against hate crime said, “the terrorist attack by Hamas against Israel also has an impact on their lives in Germany”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.36am GMT
block-time published-time 10.00am GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
It is noon in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the latest headlines …
Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said early on Tuesday morning that Hamas is “close to” a truce agreement with Israel.  “We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, adding that the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators.Hamas official Izzat el Reshiq told Al Jazeera that ongoing talks were for a truce that would last “a number of days” and include arrangements for the entry of aid in to Gaza, and a swap of hostages taken by Hamas for people imprisoned by Israel.Two sources familiar with the truce talks told AFP a tentative deal includes a five-day truce, comprising a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations over southern Gaza.  In return, between 50 and 100 prisoners held by Hamas and Islamic Jihad – a separate Palestinian militant group – would be released. They would include Israeli civilians and captives of other nationalities, but no military personnel.Qatar ’s prime minister said on Sunday that a deal to free some of the hostages in return for a temporary ceasefire hinged on “minor” practical issues.Israeli national security minister Itamar Ben-Gvir issued a statement Tuesday morning warning against a deal.Israel’s air force has posted to social media to claim that in the last 24 hours it has “struck approximately 250 Hamas terror targets”.  The Israeli military also issued a video of its troops in action within the Gaza  Strip, claiming that “division 162 completed the encirclement of Jabalia tonight and is ready for the continuation of the attack”.Ashraf al-Qudra, spokesperson for the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry, has claimed this morning that Israeli airstrikes targeted the house of the deputy undersecretary of the health ministry, with at least 17 people killed.Israel’s military has issued a statement to say that fire is again being exchanged over the UN-drawn blue line boundary between Israel and Lebanon. There are unconfirmed media reports that two journalists and one other person have been killed in the region.
block-time published-time 9.58am GMT 
 Reuters has a quick snap that Lebanese state media is reporting two journalists and one other person have been killed in southern Lebanon near the UN-drawn boundary between Israel and Lebanon. 
Israel’s military offensive in Gaza has already produced the deadliest month for journalists  since statistics began more than three decades ago.
More details soon …
block-time published-time 9.43am GMT 
Interfax reports that the Russia ’s ministry of emergency situations says it has delivered more humanitarian aid to Egypt for Gaza, with a plane departing for El-Arish airport at 6.20am Moscow time. 
The ministry said it had sent seven previous shipments, including “mattresses, pillows, personal hygiene products, food and baby food.”
block-time published-time 9.39am GMT 
 Ashraf al-Qudra, spokesperson for the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry, has spoken to Al Jazeera. It reports he told them:
Israeli airstrikes targeted the house of the deputy undersecretary of the health ministry this morning. There were 56 of his relatives in the house who were displaced from different areas of Gaza. Rescue teams managed to find 17 bodies while the rest are still under the rubble.
The claims have not been independently verified. 
block-time published-time 9.12am GMT 
 Israel’s military has issued a statement to say that fire is again being exchanged over the UN-drawn blue line boundary between Israel and Lebanon. 
On the Telegram messaging app it wrote:
A short while ago, IDF aircraft identified and struck three armed terrorist cells in the area of the border with Lebanon. In addition, IDF fighter jets struck a number of Hezbollah terror targets, including military infrastructure and structures used for directing terrorist activity. A short while ago, terrorists fired mortar shells at an IDF post in northern Israel. No injuries were reported. IDF artillery is currently striking the source of the fire.
block-time published-time 9.06am GMT 
Toby Fricker of Unicef has spoken to the BBC, saying the agency would act to bring in aid to Gaza if there was a deal on a truce. He told the broadcaster from Amman:
If there’s an immediate humanitarian ceasefire which Unicef and many others have been calling for, then yes, then we need to bring in the supplies as quickly as we can and to get them to shelters, to get them to people wherever they are inside the Gaza Strip, wherever they are in need, which is pretty much everywhere.
block-time published-time 8.45am GMT 
 A newly formed group made up of senior officials from several Muslim countries will visit the UN security council’s five permanent members and others to urge an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, a Turkish foreign ministry source told Reuters on Tuesday. 
The group will meet British prime minister, Rishi Sunak, and French president, Emmanuel Macron, during visits to Britain and France on Wednesday, the source said.
The group includes foreign ministers and representatives from Turkey, Qatar, Egypt, Jordan, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Indonesia, the Palestinian Authority, as well as the Organisation of Islamic cooperation (OIC) secretary general.
“The primary goal of the contact group is for a ceasefire to be announced as soon as possible and for humanitarian aid to be sent to Gaza,” the source told Reuters.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41am GMT
block-time published-time 8.44am GMT 
The Palestine Red Crescent Society has just posted to social media to say that on average it has been receiving “around 42 trucks per day” of humanitarian aid, and that since 21 October, “a total of 1353 trucks have been received.”
enltr??Since October 21, 2023, a total of 1353 trucks have been received, averaging around 42 trucks per day. #Gaza #HumanitarianAid pic.twitter.com/JwfInNg1r1
 — PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 8.38am GMT 
 The Times of Israel is reporting that Israeli national security minister  Itamar Ben-Gvir  has issued a statement warning against a deal with Hamas. 
It quotes him saying “I’m very concerned because there is talk of some deal. We are being kept out, and we’re not being told the truth. The rumours are that Israel is again going to make a major mistake in similar vein to the Shalit deal.”
In a 2011 deal , Israel released over 1,000 Palestinian prisoners it held in return for the hostage Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit.
Ben-Gvir said, according to the Times of Israel report, that Israel might be about to make “a deal that might bring disaster”.
Yesterday Ben-Gvir was involved in angry exchanges with families of those being held hostage by Hamas. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.33am GMT
block-time published-time 8.29am GMT 
 Israel’s air force has posted to social media to claim that in the last 24 hours it has “struck approximately 250 Hamas terror targets”. 
The Israeli military has also issued a video of its troops in action within the Gaza Strip, claiming that “division 162 completed the encirclement of Jabalia tonight and is ready for the continuation of the attack”.
iwrtl????? 162 ?????? ????? ?? ????? ??????? ?????? ????? ??????; ?????? ????? ??????? ??????. ????? ???????? ?? 215 ???? ??? ?? ??? ?????? ???? ????? ???? ?????? ????? ?'?????. ?????? ???? ????? ???? ????? ????? ??? ???? ??? ???????? ????? >> pic.twitter.com/oOhTguNHbO
 — ??? ????? ?????? (@idfonline) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 8.03am GMT 
 Al Jazeera is reporting that people are trapped under rubble after Israeli air raids targeted eight houses near Kamal Adwan hospital in the northern Gaza Strip. 
The network reports:
Images from site, verified by Al Jazeera, show widespread destruction as rescuers searched for victims. One man crying loudly can be seen searching under the rubble for friends and family using the phone flash. According to an ambulance official at the site, they only had two ambulances to carry those killed and injured. One paramedic said the houses had more than ten people residing in there, with one home having up to 18 people.
It is unclear how many people remain in the north of Gaza after over a month of Israeli bombardments and repeated instructions by Israel’s military that civilians should flee to the south of Gaza, which has also been repeatedly bombed.
AP notes the UN agency for Palestinian refugees estimates that about 160,000 people are still in its shelters there, even though it is no longer able to provide services. About 1.7 million Palestinians, about three fourths of Gaza’s population, have fled their homes.
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza, Israel and Egypt.
    A view of a damaged apartment building following an Israeli airstrike in Khan Younis, southern Gaza Strip, one of the areas that Palestinians have been ordered to flee to for safety by the Israeli authorities. Photograph: Mohammed Saber/EPA      A handout image of weapons and equipment from the IDF which the Israeli military claims it found at a house in a location given as Gaza. Photograph: Israel Defense Forces/Reuters      A screenshot from a handout video from the Palestinian ministry of health which claims to show injured and displaced Palestinians arriving in a bus at Nasser hospital. Photograph: Palestinian Ministry Of Health/Reuters      Egyptian Red Crescent members load humanitarian aid for Gaza brought by a French air force aircraft at El-Arish international airport in Egypt. Photograph: Thomas Samson/AFP/Getty Images      A screengrab of an Israeli tank in operation inside the Gaza Strip at an undisclosed location, from a handout video by the Israeli military. Photograph: Israel Defense Forces/Reuters      
block-time published-time 7.14am GMT 
In our First Edition newsletter today, Archie Bland has spoken toDaniel Levy , president of the US / Middle East Project and an Israeli peace negotiator under prime ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Ehud Barak, about what it will take to get the hostages out – and why both sides are considering it when each has so much to lose:
“My sense is that the Israelis are always trying to get another day, and another day, and another day of operations before agreeing to a deal,” Levy said. “Each day, they hope that they’ve won the lottery and killed [Hamas leaders] Mohammed Deif or Yahya Sinwar and that they will be able to point to a major military success.”
Hamas took the hostages in part because it knows the leverage that comes with the high value that Israeli society places on the release of its citizens: the most famous example is the deal struck by Netanyahu for the release of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners  in exchange for a single Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, in 2011. (One of those prisoners was Sinwar himself.)
By its refusal to accept a deal before now, Israel has kept that leverage to a minimum. “But once that path is taken, Hamas can play that card much more effectively,” Levy said. “They’re not going to roll over for the release of the rest of the prisoners – they’re going to demand as much as they possibly can for each one.”
One reason for Netanyahu’s resistance to a deal may be his understanding that once the war comes to an end, his own position will come under far more urgent scrutiny because of a wide consensus that the failure to protect civilians near the Gaza border was his responsibility. “He is almost certainly toast the morning after the war is over,” said Levy. “The same is probably true of the military leadership, so they have not played the moderating role that they might ordinarily be expected to.”
 Read more here: Tuesday briefing – How a deal that could mean a truce in Gaza became possible
 Related:  Tuesday briefing: How a deal that could mean a truce in Gaza became possible
Sign up here for our daily newsletter, First Edition
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.36am GMT
block-time published-time 7.08am GMT 
 Israel’s military has issued its latest update on the operational situation, and has said that it is “operating against terrorist infrastructure and operatives in the Jabalia area in the northern Gaza Strip”. 
In the update posted to social media and to the Telegram messaging app, the IDF claimed “during the battle, the division struck three tunnel shafts in the area of Jabalia, in which terrorists were hiding” and that “troops killed dozens of terrorists with air support, captured enemy weapons in various locations, including private houses and children’s bedrooms, and located and destroyed tunnel shafts.”
The claims have not been independently verified. 
This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com. 
block-time published-time 7.00am GMT 
 Hamas says truce agreement is 'close': what we know  Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh said early on Tuesday morning that Hamas is “close to” a truce agreement with Israel. “We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, adding that the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators.Hamas official Izzat el Reshiq told Al Jazeera that ongoing talks were for a truce that would last “a number of days” and include arrangements for the entry of aid in to Gaza, and a swap of hostages taken by Hamas for people imprisoned by Israel.El Reshiq said the deal would include the release of Israeli women and children from Gaza in exchange for Palestinian women and children from “occupation prisons”.El Reshiq said that Qatar would announce the agreement.Two sources familiar with the truce talks told AFP a tentative deal includes a five-day truce, comprising a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations over southern Gaza.  In return, between 50 and 100 prisoners held by Hamas and Islamic Jihad – a separate Palestinian militant group – would be released. They would include Israeli civilians and captives of other nationalities, but no military personnel.Qatar’s prime minister said on Sunday that a deal to free some of the hostages in return for a temporary ceasefire hinged on “minor” practical issues.On Monday, the US president, Joe Biden, said he believed a deal to free the hostages was close. “I believe so,” Biden said when asked whether a hostage deal was near, and crossed his fingers. The White House said the negotiations were in the “endgame” stage, but refused to give further details, saying it could jeopardise a successful outcome.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.03am GMT
block-time published-time 6.32am GMT 
Here is the beginning of the latest entries from Ziad’s diary in Gaza  :
I have been having nightmares. I believe it is due to a variety of reasons: fear, stress, the cold weather and lack of proper sleep. I would manage to sleep for a few minutes or an hour from time to time. At first, my nightmares were about me or a loved one dying by a bomb. But now they are different, they are about not being able to find food. I have been so lucky that, till now, we have food, regardless of what it is; today one thing is available and tomorrow another. This is a blessing.
This night, I dreamed about going to many shops, fancy ones. None of them had anything edible. The last one did have, but the seller refused to sell to me. I kept screaming at him: “I have money, I have money.” I woke up with half of my body off the couch I was sleeping on.
Jack the cat’s health has deteriorated suddenly. We don’t know why. He feels cold even though we are covering him properly. My sister held him all night, he had his arm around hers. He refused to even drink water. I hope he gets better.
 Related:  Gaza diary part 24: ‘The situation is very bad, people are panicking. They want to survive’
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.46am GMT
block-time published-time 6.11am GMT 
If you’re just joining us: Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh has said his militant movement is nearing a truce agreement with Israel , more than six weeks after its deadly assault sparked retaliatory strikes on Gaza in which thousands have been killed.
“We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, and the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators.
Hamas official Izzat el Reshiq told Al Jazeera that ongoing talks were for a truce that would last “a number of days” and include arrangements for the entry of aid in to Gaza, and a swap of hostages taken by Hamas for people imprisoned by Israel.  Reshiq said the deal would include the release of Israeli women and children from Gaza in exchange for Palestinian women and children from “occupation prisons”.
Negotiators have been working to secure a deal to allow the release of around 240 mostly Israeli hostages who were seized on 7 October. Qatar, where Hamas  has a political office and where Haniyeh is based, has been mediating.
Talk of an imminent agreement has swirled for days. Qatar’s prime minister said on Sunday that a deal to free some of the hostages in return for a temporary ceasefire hinged on “minor” practical issues, while on Monday, US president Joe Biden said he believed a deal to free the hostages was close. “I believe so,” Biden said when asked whether a hostage deal was near, and crossed his fingers.
The White House said the negotiations were in the “endgame” stage, but refused to give further details, saying it could jeopardise a successful outcome.
 Related:  Hamas leader says militant group ‘close’ to truce agreement with Israel
block-time published-time 6.02am GMT 
 Israel-Hamas war is deadliest conflict on record for reporters, says watchdog  
Israel’s military offensive in Gaza  has produced the deadliest month for journalists since statistics began more than three decades ago, and created a news blackout in the embattled territory, the Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) has said.
The reporters’ watchdog has recorded the deaths of 48 reporters since Hamas  embarked on a murderous killing spree in Israel on 7 October, triggering a concerted Israeli bombardment and ground invasion of Gaza in response.
The committee had already labelled the first month after the Hamas attacks as the most lethal suffered by journalists since 1992 before six more Palestinian journalists were killed in Gaza over the weekend.
Five were killed on Saturday alone, making it the second deadliest of the war apart from the day of Hamas’ attack, when six journalists lost their lives.
The spiralling death toll over a six-week period compares with the 42 journalists killed worldwide in the whole of 2022, including 15 who died covering Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, widely considered a highly dangerous conflict for news media.
The CPJ says the lethal trend also far outstrips the 30 journalists killed at the height of the Syrian civil war, previously regarded as the deadliest war zone for journalists in recent times.
 Related:  Israel-Hamas war is deadliest conflict on record for reporters, says watchdog
block-time published-time 5.53am GMT 
 IDF strikes 'about 250' places in Gaza  
The IDF says that it has carried our airstrikes on “about 250” sites in Gaza in the last day, which it describes as “targets of the terrorist organisation Hamas”.
    Smoke rises after Israeli air strikes in Gaza, as seen from southern Israel, amid the ongoing conflict between Israel and the Palestinian group Hamas, 21 November 2023.  Photograph: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.49am GMT
block-time published-time 5.31am GMT 
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian affairs reports that on Monday, “one Palestinian man died of wounds sustained after being shot by Israeli forces during a search-and-arrest operation in Jenin Refugee Camp on 9 November, bringing the death toll during that operation to 15, including four children.” 
Israel’s raid on Jenin on 9 November is the deadliest West Bank raid since the second Palestinian intifada, or uprising, of the 2000s.
block-time published-time 5.12am GMT 
In an in-depth profile of Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu for the Guardian, Joshua Leifer, an associate editor at Dissent formerly based in Jerusalem, writes:
An attack like Hamas’s 7 October massacre was not supposed to have been possible. Certainly not while prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu  was in charge. He was, as his acolytes put it, “Mr Security”. He wanted to be remembered, he said, as “the protector of Israel”. He boasted that Israel had never known a more peaceful and prosperous time than the roughly 16 years he has been in power. It was under his successive administrations that Israel installed the Iron Dome system to intercept rockets from the Gaza Strip, and constructed, along the Gaza border, a 40-mile, $1.1bn fence, equipped with underground sensors, remote-controlled weapons and an expansive camera system. The success of Netanyahu’s vision of Fortress Israel could be measured in the imperceptibility of the Palestinians and their suffering from the comfort of a Tel Aviv cafe.
But the relative calm of the last decade-and-a-half was built upon a series of illusions: that the Palestinians and their aspirations for freedom could be hidden behind concrete barriers and ignored; that any remaining resistance could be managed through a combination of technology and overwhelming firepower; that the world, and especially Sunni Arab states, had grown so tired of the Palestinian issue that it could be removed from the global agenda, and consequently, that Israeli governments could do as they pleased and suffer few consequences.
 Related:  The Netanyahu doctrine: how Israel’s longest-serving leader reshaped the country in his image
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.12am GMT
block-time published-time 4.50am GMT 
Meanwhile Al Jazeera reports that Israeli forces have struck communications towers in Gaza City and northern Gaza, cutting off communications. The Guardian has not verified this report independently.
block-time published-time 4.38am GMT 
 Details of truce to be announced by Qatar - Hamas official  
“The expected agreement will include the release of Israeli women and children hostages in exchange for release of Palestinian children and women in the occupation’s prisons,” Izzat el Reshiq told Al Jazeera. The details of the truce will be announced by Qatari officials, el Reshiq said.
As far as we know, Hamas says that a truce deal is “close”. Just to be clear: we do not know whether a deal has been reached or terms finalised, and there has not been announcement to this effect yet. 
We will bring you more information as it emerges. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.40am GMT
block-time published-time 4.35am GMT 
 Possible truce terms include swap of women and children hostages for women and children prisoners  
Hamas official Izzat el Reshiq told Al Jazeera that the conditions of the truce deal will include the release of Israeli women and children from Gaza in exchange for Palestinian women and children from “occupation prisons”.
block-time published-time 4.34am GMT 
 Truce under discussion would last 'a number of days' – Hamas official  
Hamas official Izzat el Reshiq has told Al Jazeera that the ongoing talks are for a truce that would last “a number of days” and include arrangements for the entry of aid in to Gaza, and a deal, arrangements for entry of aid into Gaza, and a swap of hostages taken by Hamas for people imprisoned by Israel.
block-time published-time 4.32am GMT 
 Hamas leader Haniyeh says ‘we are close to reaching a truce agreement’  
The chief of Hamas told Reuters on Tuesday that the Palestinian militant group was near a truce agreement with Israel. Hamas officials are “close to reaching a truce agreement” with Israel and the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators, Ismail Haniyeh said in a statement sent to Reuters by his aide. US President Joe Biden said on Monday he believed an accord was near. “We’re closer now than we’ve been before,” White House spokesman John Kirby said of an agreement aimed at securing the release of some hostages held in Gaza and a pause in the fighting that would allow much needed aid into Gaza.
Two sources familiar with the truce talks have told AFP a tentative deal includes a five-day truce, comprised of a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations over southern Gaza.
In return, between 50 and 100 prisoners held by Hamas and Islamic Jihad – a separate Palestinian militant group – would be released.
They would include Israeli civilians and captives of other nationalities, but no military personnel.
block-time published-time 4.30am GMT 
 Opening summary  
This is the Guardian’s live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war with me, Helen Sullivan.
The chief of Hamas told Reuters on Tuesday that the Palestinian militant group was near a truce agreement with Israel. Hamas officials are “close to reaching a truce agreement” with Israel and the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators, Ismail Haniyeh said in a statement sent to Reuters by his aide. There were no more details about the terms of the potential agreement. US President Joe Biden said on Monday he believed an accord was near. “We’re closer now than we’ve been before,” White House spokesman John Kirby said of an agreement aimed at securing the release of some hostages held in Gaza and a pause in the fighting that would allow much needed aid into Gaza.
Here are the other key recent developments:
Gaza authorities said at least 13,300 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza since 7 October. The death toll, published by Gaza’s government media office on Monday, includes 5,600 children and 3,550 women.Israeli forces continued their offensive against Hamas in northern Gaza, closing in on the Indonesian hospital where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks.  The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “appalled”  by reports that 12 people, including patients, were killed in overnight shelling at the last hospital operating in northern Gaza. Some 200 patients have been evacuated  from the Indonesian hospital on Monday, Gaza’s health ministry has said.The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that health services in Gaza have suffered “catastrophic” damage, with most hospitals no longer functioning. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s health emergencies programme, warned that the thousands of injuries sustained by civilians across Gaza, combined with the growing public health crisis  in the besieged enclave,  is a “recipe for epidemics”.  He also described Israel’s cooperation for humanitarian relief in Gaza as “subpar”. The medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said a clinic it operated in Gaza City was attacked on Monday morning.  Part of the building was engulfed in flames, it said, and four marked MSF cars were burned while a fifth was found crushed by a heavy vehicle or a tank. The charity said  it was not immediately aware of the status of one member of staff and 20 family members.Twenty-eight premature babies were rescued  from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City and taken to Egypt on Monday. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said 31 “very sick” babies were moved from al-Shifa hospital in a joint operation with the UN and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, and 12 of them had been flown to Cairo.  Three babies remain in Gaza.Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal that would see the release of a significant number of hostages,possibly in return  for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Joe Biden on Monday said he believed a deal is near , and the White House later said the US is “doing everything we can” and that it believed “we’re closer than we’ve ever been”. Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Hamas members. The families said on Monday  that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives. The row  underlines the deep divisions in Israel over how to deal with the hostage crisis.The UN secretary general has said it is clear that the war in Gaza has seen “a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented  in any conflict” since he began his role in 2017. At a press conference on Monday, António Guterres also said he did not believe a UN protectorate in Gaza would be a solution to the conflict and that war must “move in a determined, irreversible way to a two-state solution”. Relief trucks originally from Jordan entered Gaza from Egypt on Monday with the intention of setting up a new field hospitalin the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis. Jordanian state media said it hoped the facility  would help ease some of the humanitarian crisis as Israel’s forces seize medical facilities in the north.Yemen’s Houthi rebels said they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.  They have since released video footage reportedly  showing armed men seizing a ship. Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Canadian writers ask Giller prize to drop charges against pro-Palestinian protesters
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 3:40 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: BOOKS; Version:1
Length: 486 words
Byline: Ella Creamer
Highlight: More than 1,800 writers and publishers have signed an open letter in support of the pro-Palestinian protest at the prestigious literary award last week
Body


More than 1,800 writers and publishers have signed an open letter  in support of the pro-Palestine protesters who disrupted the ceremony of a prestigious Canadian literary award last week.
Among the signatories is Canadian author Sarah Bernstein, the winner of the C$100,000 (£58,000) Scotiabank Giller prize.
The Giller prize event was first interrupted when protesters jumped onstage with signs that read “Scotiabank funds genocide”, while another protester shouted that Scotiabank “currently has a $500m [£398.7m] stake in Elbit Systems” and that “Elbit Systems is supplying the Israeli military’s genocide against the Palestinian people”.
The event was interrupted a second time when the winner’s announcement was being made. As Bernstein’s name was called, a protester posing as a photographer began shouting, so the organisers repeated the announcement.
The letter states that protesters were booed by the audience, forcibly removed, detained by police for three hours after the event ended and are now facing charges, which it says should be dropped.
Bernstein said she “was only made aware what had happened at the Giller ceremony after the event”, which she attended via a one-way video link. “I support the right to protest, and I hope the charges against the protesters will be dropped,” she added. “I’m proud to join fellow Canadian writers in also calling for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza.” She won the prize for her novel Study for Obedience , which is also shortlisted for this year’s Booker prize , announced on Sunday.
“We ask all of our literary institutions to be loud where our governments and news outlets have been silent,” reads the letter. “To call for a ceasefire; to express condemnation for the collective punishment of Palestinians and the war crimes being enacted by the Israeli government; to exert pressure on the Canadian government to stop its military funding to, and diplomatic support for, the Israeli government; to call for a release of all hostages: Israeli hostages and the 5,000 Palestinian civilians (including 170 children) who are illegally incarcerated in Israeli prisons  ; and to urge Israel to end the 75-year occupation of Palestine.”
Along with Bernstein, other signatories include Noor Naga, co-winner of this year’s Arab American book award for her novel If an Egyptian Cannot Speak English. “Activists do not disrupt peace; they disrupt the silence of complicity,” Naga wrote in a post on X.  “They do not disrupt order; they identify the disorder. We owe these activists our awareness, our aliveness. They did what we celebrate literature for doing: wake us up”.
Elbit Systems is an Israel-based arms manufacturer that has long been criticised by activists  for supplying the Israeli military. In April, American investigative news outlet the Intercept reported  that Scotiabank’s stake in the company was estimated to be $500m, making it the largest foreign shareholder.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




The Netanyahu doctrine: how Israel’s longest-serving leader reshaped the country in his image
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 5348 words
Byline: Joshua Leifer
Highlight: He first became prime minister in 1996, and has been pushing the country further right ever since. Most agree his political days are numbered – but the approach he established will prove very difficult to shift
Body


An attack like Hamas’s 7 October massacre was not supposed to have been possible. Certainly not while prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu was in charge. He was, as his acolytes put it, “Mr Security”. He wanted to be remembered, he said, as “the protector of Israel”. He boasted that Israel had never known a more peaceful and prosperous time than the roughly 16 years he has been in power. It was under his successive administrations that Israel installed the Iron Dome system to intercept rockets from the Gaza Strip, and constructed, along the Gaza border, a 40-mile, $1.1bn fence, equipped with underground sensors, remote-controlled weapons and an expansive camera system. The success of Netanyahu’s vision of Fortress Israel could be measured in the imperceptibility of the Palestinians and their suffering from the comfort of a Tel Aviv cafe.
But the relative calm of the last decade-and-a-half was built upon a series of illusions: that the Palestinians and their aspirations for freedom could be hidden behind concrete barriers and ignored; that any remaining resistance could be managed through a combination of technology and overwhelming firepower; that the world, and especially Sunni Arab states, had grown so tired of the Palestinian issue that it could be removed from the global agenda, and consequently, that Israeli governments could do as they pleased and suffer few consequences.
The attack on 7 October shattered all these presumptions. Hamas gunmen on motorbikes and the backs of pickup trucks sailed through the “smart” barrier that cost more than the entire GDP of Grenada. Caught off guard, Israel’s army appeared almost immobilised, unable to regain control of some towns  and kibbutzim for more than 48 hours. Every aspect of Netanyahu’s project collapsed on the Saturday morning Israelis have taken to calling “the black shabbat”.
Successive Netanyahu governments did not make Israelis safer. Instead, they made them vulnerable to attacks such as the one Hamas carried out. Netanyahu did not chart a path for Israel out of its dependence on the United States. Instead, he left Israel as dependent on its US backer as it was during the only comparable disaster in Israel’s history, the 1973 Yom Kippur war. Netanyahu promised to streamline the state and make government more efficient. Instead, Israel’s bureaucracy has been hollowed out, its social services underfunded and unresponsive.
And yet, while Netanyahu’s vision for Israel has been utterly discredited, there is no clear successor poised to break with it. The iron tracks that Netanyahu laid may prove too hard to shift. The current crisis may very well mark the end of Netanyahu’s public career. But Israel may also be trapped in conditions of his making long after he is gone.
                   * * *                   
On a dark October night in 1995, Netanyahu stood  on a balcony overlooking Jerusalem’s Zion Square. A banner reading “Death to Arabs” had been unfurled before him. An inflamed crowd of tens of thousands stood below him. Yitzhak Rabin, prime minister at the time, was pushing for a negotiated settlement with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), and this was a protest organised by the Oslo Accords’ rightwing opponents. At the time, Netanyahu was the 46-year-old elected leader of Israel’s rightwing Likud party. He was widely seen as a brash new face in a tired political scene still dominated by veterans of Israel’s founding.
A savvy political operator, Netanyahu had staked his political future on opposing the Oslo peace process. That summer, he had joined a demonstration that featured a mock funeral procession for Rabin, replete with a coffin and a noose, where protesters chanted “Death to Rabin”. In the streets of Jerusalem that October night, demonstrators brandished signs denouncing Rabin as a traitor. They held aloft pictures of him in the uniform of the Nazi SS, and in PLO chair Yasser Arafat’s keffiyeh. They chanted “in blood and fire we will expel Rabin”, and, again, “Death to Rabin”.
One month later, a religious nationalist law student named Yigal Amir fired two shots into Rabin’s back, killing him and the vision of territorial compromise he represented. Outside the hospital where Rabin’s death was announced, a crowd of the prime minister’s supporters chanted “Bibi is a murderer”. It was, of course, Amir who pulled the trigger. But Netanyahu was among the most prominent figures who had fuelled the atmosphere of violence in which Amir did the deed.
In 1996, the Labor party leader and Rabin’s successor, Shimon Peres, called elections in the hope of reaffirming a popular mandate for the Oslo peace process. According to the polls, it was a safe bet. Netanyahu’s popularity had begun to flag in the aftermath of Rabin’s assassination. But after a string of suicide bombings in the months before the May elections, Netanyahu’s fortunes began to improve. He hammered Peres on the perils of territorial compromise, framed his dovish opponent as weak and warned that Peres “would divide Jerusalem”. By a threadbare margin – less than 1% of the vote – Netanyahu staged a surprise upset. He became the youngest prime minister in Israel’s history.
Netanyahu’s first three-year term was not a success, but many of the hallmarks of his approach were already evident. Pressed by the Clinton administration to advance peace negotiations, Netanyahu strung the Americans along, committing only to the bare minimum required to keep the peace process alive, while doing everything possible to prevent a final status agreement in the long run. In the eyes of his rightwing critics, Netanyahu did not break decisively enough with the two-state solution. As Netanyahu saw it, however, the best way to prevent a Palestinian state was to do so quietly, without the fanfare that formal annexation or direct rejection of the US-led peace process would have entailed.
Netanyahu is not a conventional ideologue. His opposition to a two-state solution does not derive from any messianic conviction or biblical inspiration. While many of his supporters are religious traditionalists, he is staunchly secular and doesn’t even keep kosher.  Instead, his worldview is shaped by deep pessimism. “I’m asked if we will for ever live by the sword – yes,” he told a group of Knesset members in 2015. He had absorbed this view as a child. His father, Benzion Netanyahu, was a dyspeptic historian of the Spanish Inquisition who died in 2012, at the age of 102. “ Jewish history is in large measure a history of holocausts ,” Netanyahu Sr  once told the New Yorker’s David Remnick. For Netanyahu the son, that catastrophic vision of history has meant that nearly all matters of defence appear refracted through the lens of existential threat. According to such calculus, any Palestinian state would almost certainly devolve into an Islamist terror state threatening Israel’s existence; therefore indefinite Israeli control over the occupied territories is an absolute necessity for Jewish survival.
Netanyahu combined this bleak worldview with a mastery of the art of political presentation. He was Israel’s first real TV prime minister. He took acting classes to perfect his public performances. He wore makeup and made sure the cameras only showed his good side. At a time when most other Israeli politicians still favoured rolled-up shirt sleeves, Netanyahu appeared in bold Brioni suits, and this taste for luxury, too, would remain throughout his years in power.
A former special forces commando turned management consultant, Netanyahu embodied the new Israeli synthesis of hawkish neoliberalism. He was, at once, a technocrat and a populist. In 1996, he arrived in office with elaborate plans to remake the Israeli economy along Thatcherite free-market lines: restructuring of the country’s bureaucracy, liberalising the labour market; cutting subsidies for struggling industries. He accomplished little of this programme. More significant were the changes he brought to the country’s political culture. Ever since Menachem Begin’s premiership in the 1970s, Likud had used the rhetoric of class resentment and religious traditionalism to mobilise its base of largely working-class Mizrahim, Jews of Middle Eastern and north African origin. Netanyahu sharpened Likud’s populism for the age of the soundbite. His supporters rallied behind the slogan “Netanyahu – good for the Jews”, which implied that his opponents were disloyal to Jewish interests.
After he returned to power in 2009, Netanyahu vowed never to lose it. As Israeli journalist Ben Caspit details in his book, The Netanyahu Years, Netanyahu crushed or expelled any potential rivals within Likud. By 2015, he had “metamorphosed”, Haaretz editor Aluf Benn wrote, “from a risk-averse conservative into a rightwing radical”. He transformed a party that, while always staunchly and even violently nationalist, had once included economic and social liberals into an authoritarian populist party centred on his charismatic personality. Encouraged by his wife, Sara, and his son, Yair, Netanyahu also began to think of himself as indispensable, as the incarnation of the national spirit, as identical to the state itself. “Without Bibi,” Sara Netanyahu has repeatedly said, “Israel is doomed.”
                   * * *                   
Over his long years in power, a distinct “Netanyahu model” of politics emerged. When it came to the issue of the Palestinians, Netanyahu’s core belief was that the occupation could be managed and maintained indefinitely. In theory, Netanyahu suggested that he would be willing to accept the “demilitarised” Palestinian state that he described in a 2009 speech at Bar-Ilan University.  Yet in practice, as he outlined in the same speech, the conditions under which he would agree to such a state were ones that no Palestinian leader could ever accept: not just demilitarisation and Israeli security control over airspace, but also an Israeli capital in an undivided Jerusalem. It was a bluff to keep the illusion of a peace process alive while further entrenching the occupation.
Netanyahu’s belief that the occupation could remain in perpetuity was, and is, widely shared. The Israeli centre-right’s leading intellectual, the philosopher Micah Goodman, gave the idea of occupation-management a respectable patina of pragmatism in his 2018 book Catch-67.  Rather than hoping to “solve” the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Goodman suggested that it might be “minimised” – for instance, by expanding areas of limited Palestinian autonomy while maintaining ultimate Israeli dominance in the occupied West Bank.
Even Netanyahu’s political opponents have embraced this approach. The short-lived “change” government led by the former TV host Yair Lapid and settler leader Naftali Bennett, which briefly deposed Netanyahu in the spring of 2021, did not deviate from the Netanyahu model, but deepened it further. It was under the Lapid-Bennett government when Palestinian casualties in the West Bank began to spike. This was also the period when Benny Gantz, at the time minister of defence, designated six leading Palestinian human rights NGOs “terrorist organisations” as part of Israel’s efforts to quash opposition to the occupation.
To its proponents, the occupation-management paradigm had numerous practical advantages. Maintaining the status quo lowered the risk of enraging the international community. Indefinite yet putatively temporary occupation also enabled Israel to keep the Palestinians disenfranchised, whereas formal annexation would require Israel to decide whether to grant Palestinians in the annexed territories citizenship and, from Israel’s point of view, risk jeopardising the Jewish demographic majority.
Yet for Netanyahu and his allies, it was not enough simply to entrench the occupation; it was also necessary to guarantee that no unified Palestinian movement might arise. The way to do that, according to Netanyahu, was to strengthen the Islamist Hamas in Gaza at the expense of its rival, the Fatah-dominated PLO in the West Bank. To prop up the Hamas government in Gaza, at Israel’s request, the Qatari government transferred billions of dollars to the militant group. “Anyone who wants to prevent the creation of a Palestinian state needs to support strengthening Hamas,” said Netanyahu  at a Likud party meeting in 2019. “This is part of our strategy, to divide the Palestinians between those in Gaza and those in Judea and Samaria.”
What Israelis call “the conceptzia” – this paradigm of occupation-management and divide-and-rule – had its counterpart in the realm of foreign policy. Until 2020, the only Arab states to sign treaties with Israel were Egypt and Jordan. That changed when the Trump administration underwrote the 2020 Abraham Accords , the series of normalisation agreements between Israel and the Gulf States of Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates, as well as Morocco and, later, Sudan.  It is not a coincidence that Hamas launched its attack just as Israel and Saudi Arabia appeared to be getting closer to normalising relations. Even after the current devastating war, Israel and the Saudis may very well press on with this process, but it remains as clear as ever that long-term regional stability – and Israeli security – will depend on ending the occupation and realising Palestinian national aspirations.
From the perspective of Israel’s right, regional integration also provided an alternative safety net as the US turned its focus away from the Middle East and toward Asia. As one Israeli politician, a member of Avigdor Liberman’s rightwing secularist Yisrael Beitenu party told me in the summer of 2022, “the declining stature” of the US in world affairs necessitated closer ties between Israel and other countries in the region. “People understand that they need to hang on to each other,” he said.
A Middle East where the US played a less active role had also long been a dream of Israeli hawks, who view Israeli reliance on the US as a constraint and strategic liability. In 1996, a group of neoconservative thinktankers lead by Richard Perle, who would later join the George W Bush administration, published a paper titled A Clean Break: A New Strategy for Securing the Realm , which outlined steps for how Israel under Netanyahu could “forge a new basis for relations with the United States”. According to the authors, Israel could gain “greater freedom of action and remove a significant lever of pressure against it” if it was able to “cut itself free” from US support by “liberalising its economy”.
To a large extent, Netanyahu’s successive administrations followed this strategy. Aggressive privatisations of banks and utilities, tax cuts and sharp decreases on public spending, and anti-union measures did transform Israel from a middling, state-dominated economy into an affluent, military- and surveillance-tech exporting regional power, even as inequality within Israel deepened. Under Netanyahu – first as finance minister in Ariel Sharon’s government, then during his second stint as prime minister – Israel reversed  its longstanding trade deficit and began to accumulate vast foreign currency reserves. The stronger Israel became economically, the less it required direct economic grant aid from the US, which ceased in 2008.  Even US military aid to Israel, though it still amounts to the enormous sum of $38bn, mostly comes in the form of a discount  for Israeli purchases of US arms and missile-defence funding – essentially a subsidy to US arms manufactures.
In the 2010s, Netanyahu began to turn away from the US and its allies and cultivate relationships with proudly illiberal states such as Viktor Orbán’s Hungary and Poland under the rule of outgoing leader Jaroslaw Kaczynski as a means of blocking potential measures against Israel by the European Union. He boasted of his good working relationship with Russia’s Vladmir Putin – 2019 Likud election campaign posters showed Netanyahu shaking hands with Putin  –and throughout Russian’s war on Ukraine, Israel has refused to supply missile defence systems to Ukraine and has kept criticism of Russian conduct to a minimum. Ever wary of US decline, Israel has also developed closer ties with China. In 2021, as part of China’s belt and road initiative, Israel granted  the state-owned Shanghai International Port Group a tender to operate the Haifa Bay Port shipping terminal, which manages roughly half of the country’s freight. Chinese companies have also worked on major Israeli infrastructure projects, such as the new Tel Aviv light rail system.
In Israel’s domestic sphere, Netanyahu developed a distinct mode of personalistic rule. He granted ministerial and government agency positions to Likud apparatchiks and yes-men, unknowns and incompetents whose only credential seemed to be their loyalty to him. In 2020, after he was indicted in several corruption cases, charged with  bribery, fraud and breach of trust, Netanyahu’s political style became increasingly paranoid. In a pre-trial speech , he declared: “Elements in the police and the prosecution have joined forces with the leftist media – I call them the ‘anyone but Bibi’ gang – to manufacture baseless cases against me.” This marked the crystallisation of what some Israeli commentators named “Bibism” – a synthesis of bellicose nationalism, conspiracy theorising and, above all else, the denunciation of Netanyahu’s opponents as traitors.
As more of the electorate turned against him, Netanyahu maintained a governing coalition by elevating extremist settlers and messianic ethno-nationalists to positions of power within his government. These included figures like Itamar Ben-Gvir , now minister of national security, who has previously been convicted of incitement to racism and terrorism, who as a young far-right militant had been part of a group that assaulted Yitzhak Rabin’s motorcade, and who, until recently, hung on his living room wall a picture of Baruch Goldstein, a Brooklyn-born Israeli settler who massacred 29 Palestinians at the Tomb of the Patriarchs in Hebron. As part of coalition negotiations last winter, Netanyahu transferred authority  over the military government in the West Bank to finance minister and hardline religious nationalist Bezalel Smotrich, who has called for the formal annexation of the West Bank and the expulsion of any Palestinians who resist.
Once invested with authority, Ben-Gvir and Smotrich began to push immediately for the annexation of parts of the occupied West Bank, implementing land-grab measures and approving unbridled settlement expansion, which culminated, even before the current war, in making 2023 the deadliest year for Palestinians since the second intifada. Between 1 January and 6 October , the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs recorded at least 199 Palestinian fatalities in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, the highest figure since 2005.
                   * * *                   
Hamas’s incursion on the morning of 7 October demolished each of the prongs of Netanyahu’s project. The scale and cruelty of the assault demonstrated the impossibility of maintaining the occupation for ever without continuous, devastating loss of life. For most of the past two decades, it was the Palestinians who bore the vast majority of this human cost, and those years lulled Israel into a dangerous complacency and indifference toward the fates of their Palestinian neighbours. The Hamas leadership recognised this vulnerability and exploited it to murderous effect.
While it will take time to grasp fully the extent of the Israeli intelligence failure, what has emerged so far is that military officials ignored what should have been warning signs. According to Haaretz, Israel intelligence stopped listening  to Hamas walkie-talkie chatter months before the attacks. On a recent TV interview, a 20-year-old soldier from the 7th armoured brigade said his unit had received reports of unusual activity at about 11pm the night of 6 October but were issued no follow-up command. At about 3am, Ronen Bar, director of the Shin Bet, Israel’s internal security service, received a call  in response to such reports. After hours of deliberation in the early morning, he sent only a small special forces team to the Gaza separation-fence area. Convinced that Hamas had been pacified, deterred and integrated into the Israeli apparatus of occupation-management, Israel’s generals did not take seriously that Hamas could carry out an attack of such magnitude.
The attacks also revealed with terrifying clarity the strategic risk posed by the ongoing settlement enterprise in the West Bank. One reason why Hamas gunmen managed to overwhelm Israeli defences, and why it took so long for Israeli forces to retake the towns and kibbutzim that had been overrun, was that much of Israel’s army had been sent to the West Bank. That weekend was the Jewish holiday of Simchat Torah – under normal circumstances a time of joy and dancing, but in the occupied West Bank, a time of heightened settler violence. The Israeli army had even relocated forces away from the Gaza border to the West Bank, to guard Israeli settlers. In total, 32 IDF battalions had deployed to the occupied West Bank, while just two battalions deployed along the Gaza border. This left the kibbutzim and towns of the western Negev – the citizens of Israel proper – vulnerable, while West Bank settlers could terrorise the Palestinian population under IDF cover. Advocates of settlement-building have long claimed that their efforts bolstered Israel’s security. Reality has proven their argument wrong.
Netanyahu’s failures in the realm of foreign relations are no less stark. Contrary to his long-held view, the question of Palestine will not simply go away. No real Israeli integration into the broader Middle East will be possible without a long-term agreement that ends the occupation of the West Bank and the siege of the Gaza Strip. The current war has frayed Israel’s relations with Egypt and Jordan, its two most crucial Arab allies. With the help of the US, the Israeli government has attempted to pressure the Egyptian government into taking Gazans into Egyptian territory, a move that reflects a reckless disregard for the stability of their south-west neighbour. Egyptian authorities have so far refused. Massive protests have broken out not only in Egypt, Jordan and Lebanon, but also in Turkey. The Abraham Accords, which Netanyahu took to be his epochal achievement, have also shown signs of strain. In early November, Bahrain recalled  its ambassador from Israel and announced that it had suspended economic ties to show support for the Palestinian cause.
Above all, the ostensible “self-reliance” that Netanyahu achieved has proved to be a farce. Amid the threat of a broader regional war, Israel now appears more dependent than ever on its US sponsor, which has moved two aircraft carrier strike groups to the Middle East to deter regional escalation of the conflict. The US provides Israel with everything from small arms, such as automatic rifles, to key components of the Iron Dome system. It even sent  three-star general James Glynn of the US Marines to advise the Israeli general staff on how to conduct urban counterinsurgency. In an unprecedented display of US involvement, secretary of state Antony Blinken and secretary of defense Lloyd Austin have both sat in on Israeli security cabinet planning meetings to counsel their Israeli counterparts.
Within Israel, the incompetent response to 7 October has exposed the toll Netanyahu’s long rule has taken on the state. For days, and in some cases weeks, after the attacks, some families reported that they had heard nothing from government officials about the whereabouts of their missing relatives; daytime TV anchors stepped in to create hotlines for those desperate for information. On the day of the attacks, when dozens of police were killed, Ben-Gvir, whose office oversees the police, was nowhere to be found; only later did he emerge, not to take responsibility for what had happened, but to stage photo-ops of himself distributing assault rifles to civilian defence units in Israeli cities. State efforts to relocate, feed and clothe the tens of thousands of Israelis evacuated from the northern and southern borders were so ineffectual that protest groups, which had formed during the demonstrations against the government’s judicial overhaul plan, stepped in to fill the void. Budget cuts to the ministry of health have created a shortage of state-funded social workers and psychologists to handle the thousands of people in need of treatment for trauma.
For his part, Netanyahu seems to be managing the crisis with his increasingly dim political future in mind. As ever, his concern is optics. He has not attended a single funeral for those killed on 7 October, presumably out of fear that attendees might accost him. He has favoured broadcast addresses and staged photo-ops with elite military units. When he finally met with representatives of the families of those taken hostage, a far-right activist with no known ties to any hostages, but with close ties to the Netanyahu family, just happened to suddenly appear  at the meeting to praise him. Having already attempted to blame military and intelligence officials for the 7 October disaster, Netanyahu is now busy collecting evidence  to exculpate himself when, after the war, he finally faces a reckoning.
                   * * *                   
Despite such efforts at image rehabilitation, Netanyahu is all but finished politically. The public’s anger towards him and his government is immense. In a recent survey conducted by Israel’s Channel 13 News, 76% of respondents  said Netanyahu needs to resign – either at the end of the war (47%) or immediately (29%). During a recent interview with the Israeli liberal daily Haaretz, the former defence minister Moshe Ya’alon, a man whose political views are to Netanyahu’s right, called the prime minister “an existential threat” to the country. Another poll found that less than 4% of Israelis believe Netanyahu is a reliable source of information about the current war.
What comes after Netanyahu? Before 7 October, his attempt to dismantle the country’s judiciary had sparked the largest protest movement  in Israel’s history. For more than nine months, hundreds of thousands took to the streets in an attempt to stave off a reactionary constitutional revolution that would have made it almost impossible for the right to lose power. These protests revitalised Israeli civil society, which had shrivelled over the course of Netanyahu’s tenure. The perceived threat of an Orbán- or Erdogan-style autocracy has re-politicised and, in some cases, even radicalised segments of Israel’s liberal, secular, educated middle classes. Any new political force that might not just challenge Netanyahu the man, but also break with his policies, will probably emerge out of this movement.
Still, what remains of Israel’s left finds itself in a difficult place. The last few years of repeated elections – there have been five since 2019 – devastated the Labor Zionist parties that once dominated Israeli political life. The Labor party itself has been reduced to just four parliamentary seats. Meretz, the civil libertarian, social-democratic party that long represented the country’s peace camp has no seats. Since 7 October, Yair Golan , a 61-year-old former IDF general and erstwhile Meretz chairman has become something of a national celebrity after he donned his uniform and rescued civilians under Hamas attack; for the time being, he is the Israeli centre-left’s last, best hope to bring a negotiated compromise with the Palestinians back to the Israeli mainstream – but it is an extremely remote possibility.
Israel’s public discourse has lurched much further to the right. TV news amplifies the calls for revenge and the use of disproportionate force, even as the death toll in Gaza rises into the tens of thousands. Each day, another Likud politician or government minister emerges to call unashamedly for war crimes. Agriculture minister Avi Dichter appeared  on television last week to urge on the “Gaza Nakba”, as he described Israel’s current ground operation. Deputy speaker of the Knesset, Nissim Vaturi, tweeted that Israel should  “Burn Gaza now, nothing less!” Earlier this month, the minister of heritage, Amihai Eliyahu suggested Israel could drop  drop a nuclear bomb on the Gaza Strip. Some Israeli pop stars have begun  to sing of conquering and rebuilding Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip. Though the political leaders of the settler right, such as Ben-Gvir and Smotrich, have been discredited, the veteran pollster Dudi Hasid recently observed that there might be space even further to their right awaiting to be filled. Netanyahu and his government have said that the aim of the war is to topple Hamas; Israel’s almost inevitable failure to fully meet this goal could, in fact, generate an increased ethno-nationalist backlash.
The most likely possibility, however, is that the Netanyahu project persists in the absence of the man himself. The most probable successor to Netanyahu is his closest rival of several years, Benny Gantz, the former IDF chief and leader of the centre-right National Unity party, whose ratings  have skyrocketed in the past six weeks. The tall, blue-eyed Gantz presents an image of martial rectitude compared to Netanyahu’s mafioso-populism. Yet Gantz is less an ideological alternative to Netanyahu than a cosmetic one. A loyal soldier for his entire life, he has known nothing other than the occupation-management paradigm, and would probably maintain it. Polling just behind Gantz, former prime minister Naftali Bennett also appears poised for a bid at power. Bennett – who once served as Netanyahu’s chief of staff – would also probably stick to the Netanyahu playbook.
For years, Netanyahu has imagined himself  as the Middle East’s Winston Churchill. The Israeli journalist Ari Shavit has observed that Netanyahu sees himself not simply as battling threats to Israel’s existence, but as a frontline defender of the west against its mortal enemies. Since the start of the current war, Netanyahu’s grandiose illusions have been on display. “We are sons of light, they are sons of darkness,” he recently declared.  Yet it is, at least in part, this very pessimism – the worldview in which it is always 1933 – that has doomed Israel under Netanyahu to endless wars – seven since he assumed power in 2009 – and condemned the Palestinians in Gaza to repeated bombardment.
Any break with the Netanyahu paradigm will require moving beyond the mentality according to which Israel’s existence hangs ever in the balance – a task that, after the massacres of 7 October, will be much more difficult. But as Israeli security officials will freely acknowledge, this ghastly war, even with its threat of turning into multi-front conflagration, is not an existential war for Israel. If there is to be any hope of undoing the Netanyahu legacy, it will come from an Israeli leader, perhaps one whose name is not yet known, with the courage to acknowledge frankly Israel’s strength and use it as a basis for a renewed push for peace.
For now, however, there are no such candidates. Netanyahu has reshaped the country in his image; he has led the country for longer than David Ben-Gurion, the country’s founding father. Even after Netanyahu the man is gone, his legacy discredited, the mould he set will prove difficult to shatter. 
  The best stories take time. The Guardian Long Read magazine  compiles the finest longform journalism the Guardian has to offer: from politics to technology, food to cosmology, literature to sex, there is something for everyone. Beautifully bound, this 100-page special edition is available to order from the Guardian bookshop  and is on sale at selected WH Smith Travel stores. 
 Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread , listen to our podcasts here  and sign up to the long read weekly email here. 

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




What is Gaza’s Indonesian hospital and why is Israel targeting it?
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 10:51 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 772 words
Byline: Helen Livingstone
Highlight: Gaza health ministry says Israeli forces are ‘laying siege’ to hospital and fear repeat of events at al-ShifaIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


A week after Israeli forces stormed Gaza’s main hospital, al-Shifa, they have begun closing in on another, the Indonesian hospital, also in northern Gaza. The territory’s ministry of health said it believed 12 people had been killed in shelling overnight to Monday and that it feared a repeat of what happened at al-Shifa. 
                   What is the Indonesian hospital?                   
Funded by Indonesia, the $9m hospital opened in 2016 just outside the territory’s largest refugee camp in Jabalia, in the north of Gaza City, on approximately 1.4 hectares (3.5 acres) of land.
The 140-bed facility, staffed by about 400 Palestinians and some Indonesian volunteers, was treating 250 patients a day when it first opened, according to the Opec Fund for International Development.  That makes it significantly smaller than al-Shifa, which had about 700 beds. 
Its services included outpatient clinics, general and orthopaedic surgery, a specialised department for abdominal diseases and one of the only modern CT scanners in the region.
                   What is happening at the hospital?                   
After al-Shifa, Gaza’s largest hospital and also in Gaza City, was raided last week, the Indonesian hospital was the only facility in northern Gaza still treating patients, with dozens of those killed and wounded by Israeli attacks flowing in overnight to Monday, according to medics.
But since Monday the hospital has been targeted by Israeli forces.  Gaza’s health ministry spokesperson, Ashraf al-Qudra, told Agence France-Presse that Israel was “laying siege” to the hospital. “We fear the same thing will happen there as it did in al-Shifa,” he added.
One medical worker, Marwan Abdallah, said tanks were clearly visible from the hospital windows, about 200 metres away, and that Israeli snipers could be seen on nearby rooftops. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire,” he said.
Abdallah and the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry said a shell struck the hospital’s second floor killing 12 people on Monday. Both blamed Israel, which denied shelling the hospital, saying its troops had returned fire on militants who targeted them from inside the compound.
The World Health Organization (WHO) cited reports  saying patients and their companions were among the dead and that tens of people were also injured, some critically. It also said there were reports that people who attempted to leave were shot at, though none were injured.
Indonesia’s foreign ministry said it had lost contact with three Indonesian volunteers who are part of the group that set up the facility.
                   How many people are still there?                   
The health ministry spokesperson told AFP about 200 patients had been evacuated and taken by bus to Nasser hospital in the southern town of Khan Younis in coordination with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
He said there were still about 400 patients at the hospital and that officials were working with the ICRC to evacuate them too. There were also about 2,000 Palestinians sheltering in the hospital grounds, he said.
Many Palestinians sought refuge in hospitals after Israel launched its offensive on Gaza last month, in the belief that Israeli forces would not target them.
                   Why are Israeli forces targeting the hospital?                   
In a briefing earlier this month , the Israeli military spokesperson R Adm Daniel Hagari, claimed the Israel Defense Forces had intelligence of a tunnel network under the hospital, as well as aerial imagery showing rocket launchers a few dozen metres from the complex.
“Hamas systematically built the Indonesian hospital to disguise its underground terror infrastructure,” Hagari said, according to the Times of Israel.
He also presented recordings of calls between Hamas officials describing their use of fuel reserves that belong to the Indonesian hospital. The Guardian was not able to verify his claims.
                   What has the international community said?                   
Indonesia’s foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, condemned what she called Israel’s “attack” on the hospital.
“The attack is a clear violation of international humanitarian laws,” she said in a statement. “All countries, especially those that have close relations with Israel, must use all their influence and capabilities to urge Israel to stop its atrocities.” 
The head of the WHO said he was “appalled” by the attack. “Health workers and civilians should never have to be exposed to such horror, and especially while inside a hospital,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on X. 

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Detained Palestinian poet Mosab Abu Toha released by Israeli forces
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:07 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 451 words
Byline: Julian Borger in Washington
Highlight: A friend of the writer says he was beaten while in Israeli detention and was receiving medical treatment in Gaza
Body


The Palestinian poet and author, Mosab Abu Toha, has been released after he was rounded up by Israeli forces along with scores of other Palestinian men trying to leave northern Gaza, according to his friends and Israeli officials.
A close friend of Abu Toha, the Palestinian-Canadian lawyer Diana Buttu said on social media  he had been beaten while in Israeli detention and was receiving medical treatment after being returned to his family.
David Remnick, the editor of the New Yorker magazine, for which Abu Toha is a contributor, confirmed that the poet was back in Gaza and reunited with his family.
“We are relieved and grateful at the news that poet Mosab Abu Toha has been released and will be reunited with his family,” PEN America said in a statement.  “Poets and writers must be free to speak truth without fear.”
According to his friends and family, Abu Toha was seized by Israeli troops at a checkpoint on Sunday , as part of a mass detention of Palestinian men, while he was attempting to reach Gaza’s southern border. He was making the trip with his wife and children after hearing from the US embassy in Israel that he was on a list of US citizens and their families allowed to cross into Egypt. One of his children was born in the US and is an American citizen.
Abu Toha had been writing in the New Yorker magazine about his experiences under bombardment in Jabalia refugee camp in northern Gaza. A collection of his poetry published in English in the US was a finalist in the National Book Critics Circle award and won an American Book award this year.
“He’s one of our most prolific writers,” Buttu said. “To be so widely published at such a young age and to have got all these awards and acclaim for his writing, it shows you just how powerful a writer he is.”
“He’s an incredible poet,” Laura Albast, a Palestinian journalist, editor and friend of Abu Toha, said. “The poetry he writes is very accessible, but it’s also a representation of what happens to us, describing how he rode his bike to try to reach home while the bombs were falling.”
Abu Toha and his family had taken refuge in Jabalia, where they heard their home in Beit Lahia had been bombed. In a New Yorker article published on 6 November, he described cycling to the house to try to salvage something from his small book collection.
“I hope to at least find a copy of my own poetry book, maybe near my neighbor’s olive tree, but there is nothing but debris. Nothing but the smell of explosions,” he wrote.
“Now I sit in my temporary house in the Jabalia camp, waiting for a ceasefire. I feel like I am in a cage. I’m being killed every day with my people. The only two things I can do are panic and breathe. There is no hope here.”

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




The pressure on Netanyahu is starting to tell – this truce shows something has changed
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 1:33 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:2
Length: 1145 words
Byline: Simon Tisdall
Highlight: A deal to pause hostilities in Gaza and free some hostages has been struck, but both sides are split on what happens next
Body


A deal with Hamas to release some of the Israeli hostages  seized on 7 October in return for a pause in the fighting in Gaza reflects a change of course by Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who has adopted an uncompromising stance since the start of Israel’s worst security crisis in 50 years.
It would probably be wrong to suggest the deal represents a softening of Netanyahu’s position. He has been adamant from the beginning that Israel’s overriding aim must be to eliminate Hamas as a military and political force in Gaza. He appears wedded to that approach, on whose success his own political future hinges.
But Netanyahu and his war cabinet, which includes the hardline defence minister Yoav Gallant, have come under intense pressure to do more from the families of the hostages, who staged a huge, five-day march to Jerusalem last week. Some relatives accuse Netanyahu of treating their loved ones as a secondary issue.
Israeli commentators attribute the apparent change of heart at the top to this effective lobbying by relatives, but also to a belated realisation that the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and the security establishment have a duty to Israel’s citizens that goes beyond the destruction of Hamas.
There has been a change on the Israeli side, wrote Haaretz columnist Amos Harel.  “It seems to stem mainly from a realisation by Gallant and IDF chief of staff Herzl Halevi that it’s impossible to focus solely on the military offensive in northern Gaza.
“The defence establishment, being responsible for the terrible failure that enabled the 7 October massacre, must start rectifying it. And the rectification doesn’t end with conquering territory and killing terrorists. First and foremost, it involves an effort to bring at least the mothers and children among the hostages back home.”
The war cabinet has reportedly been split  on the issue for weeks, with hardliners, including Netanyahu, convinced that relentless military pressure was the best way to weaken Hamas and convince its leader in Gaza, Yahya Sinwar, to free the captives. Others argue Israel must get what it can now, however unsatisfactory, before international pressure to back off in Gaza becomes irresistible.
Netanyahu’s shift may have been critically influenced by his personal encounter with hostage families , after weeks during which he refused to meet them. Netanyahu and his Likud party have lost the trust and confidence of most voters, who blame them for 7 October lapses and complacency. Polls suggest they would lose an election if one were held now. As ever, calculation is mixed with compassion.
If the hostage deal sticks, it will reportedly include the release of 50 women and children in return for the freeing of up to 150 Palestinian women and children held in Israeli detention since before the war. A total of about 240 Israelis are believed to be held hostage at present. No releases of military personnel or adult males are being considered.
The proposed deal also includes a four-day truce that would involve a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations in southern Gaza. During this time, it is assumed, unrestricted aid deliveries would resume via the Rafah crossing with Egypt. Whether other entry points into Gaza would be opened is unclear.
While welcoming any sign of movement on hostages, opposition politicians in Israel may try to represent Netanyahu’s shifting stance as a further indication that his judgment is flawed and that he should be replaced as prime minister. Yair Lapid, the main opposition leader, is already demanding Netanyahu stands down.
A deal and an accompanying ceasefire do not mean the war is over or that the hostage crisis has been resolved. It could, in theory, recommence with increased fury after both sides have had time to regroup. But it will encourage mediators, principally the Qatari government, and interested parties such as the Biden administration, to work for a more permanent halt to the fighting.
Pressure on Netanyahu and Israel’s war cabinet from the US has been growing steadily in recent weeks as President Joe Biden has faced growing disquiet among Democratic party supporters, and the US public in general, about the civilian toll in Gaza. The Hamas-run health authority says more than 13,000 Palestinians have died there since Israel’s intervention. About 1,200 people, mostly Israeli civilians, died in the Hamas attacks on 7 October. A recent poll showed most Americans favour a ceasefire. 
A hostage deal would enable Biden to claim that his behind-the-scenes influence with Israel’s leadership , to whom he pledged unstinting support on a visit to Tel Aviv last month, is proving effective. It could defuse sharp criticism of US policy from countries of the global south and mitigate divisions with European allies such as France, which has called for a ceasefire.
Hamas has been helped by the sheer weight of international condemnation of Israel’s assault on Gaza, especially within the Arab and Muslim spheres. Russia and China are among leading countries that have refused to criticise Hamas. Last week’s compromise UN security council resolution failed to include language condemning the 7 October attacks.
The impact a deal would have on the stance and future conduct of the Hamas leadership is uncertain. Sinwar, who commands Hamas forces in Gaza, is a mercurial, radical figure. Some Israeli assessments suggest he is not an entirely rational actor. At one point earlier this month he suddenly broke off hostage negotiations, only to resume contacts a few days later.
Sinwar will certainly present a deal, especially if it involves a truce, as a tactical victory and as some kind of twisted justification for the horror, misery and suffering his unprecedented attack on Israel has brought down on the heads of Gaza’s people.
He will probably claim to a watching Arab world and his ally, Iran, that despite the enormous disparity in military forces, his defiance has forced concessions from the Israeli side. Just as importantly for him, a deal would demonstrate that Hamas has survived Israel’s initial onslaught, still has teeth, as shown by continuing missile attacks on Israeli territory, and will live to fight another day.
But Sinwar does not have sole, final say over what happens next. The exiled Hamas political leadership based in Qatar, directed by Ismail Haniyeh, has been negotiating the hostage deal, and their view of any agreement, and the next steps, will not necessarily coincide with that of the fighters on the ground.
In other words, internal splits and differences within Hamas, mirroring those within Israel, could yet torpedo hostage releases and derail future moves towards a more lasting peace.
                                                               Simon Tisdall is a foreign affairs commentator                                                         

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Tuesday briefing: How a deal that could mean a truce in Gaza became possible
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 6:53 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 2615 words
Byline: Archie Bland
Highlight: In today’s newsletter: Amid growing optimism that a deal to release the hostages is back on, a former Israeli peace negotiator talks about what each side gets out of it Sign up here for our daily newsletter, First Edition
Body


Good morning. Before Israel’s ground invasion of Gaza began three weeks ago, there was talk of a deal to secure the release of some of the 240 hostages taken by Hamas in exchange for a pause in the bombardment of the territory. But the talks failed,  and thousands of Palestinians and an unknown number of the hostages have been killed in the weeks since. Now there is growing optimism that a deal is back on. 
Yesterday, Joe Biden said that an agreement was almost done; this morning, Hamas chief Ismail Haniyeh said that officials were “close to reaching a truce agreement”. Al Jazeera quotes  another Hamas official who says details will emerge in “the coming hours”. If that happens, it would be the biggest change in the dynamic between Israel and Hamas since 7 October – and some believe that it could even be a vital first step towards a more permanent end to the violence. But the US has also cautioned that until a deal is absolutely final, there is still a chance that it will collapse.
For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Daniel Levy , president of the US / Middle East Project and an Israeli peace negotiator under prime ministers Yitzhak Rabin and Ehud Barak, about what it will take to get the hostages out – and why both sides are considering it when each has so much to lose. Here are the headlines.
                   Five big stories                   
                                            Environment | The world is on track for a “hellish” 3C of global heating , the UN has warned before the crucial Cop28 climate summit in the United Arab Emirates next week. To get on track for the internationally agreed target of 1.5C, 22bn tonnes of CO 2 must be cut from the currently projected total in 2030, the report said – 42% of global emissions.
                                            Economy  | Rishi Sunak has hinted at business tax cuts to boost economic growth  as he promised to reduce the tax burden “carefully and sustainably” and “over time”. Sunak stressed the focus was “very much the supply side” of the economy in a signal that business tax cuts are more likely than personal ones.
                                            OpenAI | Turmoil has engulfed the company behind ChatGPT after nearly all of OpenAI’s 700 staff threatened to quit  unless ousted chief executive Sam Altman is reinstated. A letter to the company’s board said that the signatories could join Altman and OpenAI’s former president Greg Brockman at Microsoft, which announced it had hired the two on Monday.
                                            Covid inquiry  | Rishi Sunak would almost certainly have known scientists were worried about his “eat out to help out” scheme during the pandemic, Sir Patrick Vallance has said , directly contradicting the prime minister’s evidence to the Covid inquiry. An entry from Vallance’s diary from October 2020 also claimed that Dominic Cummings said that Sunak “thinks just let people die and that’s okay”.
                                            Nature  | Church surveillance cameras in the Netherlands have caught the first documented evidence  of any mammal mating without intromission. In plain English, they have recorded bats having sex without penetration.
                   In depth: ‘The hope is that a pause in the fighting gathers momentum’                   
Yesterday, the families of some of the Israelis who were abducted by Hamas on 7 October met with Benjamin Netanyahu and his war cabinet.  They had come to Jerusalem after a five-day march from Tel Aviv , accompanied by thousands of supporters, and their message was simple: “We have 240 people in Gaza,” Moran Mina, whose grandmother is one of the hostages, told Sky News.  “We need to bring them all back and this is our victory.”
The wishes of the families carry enormous weight in Israel – and yet there is also remarkable national unity behind the idea of neutralising the threat from Hamas. “The pressure on Netanyahu to get a deal done has been rising,” Daniel Levy said. “But there is also public support for carrying on the military assault. Getting prisoners out alive, and the life-affirming story that would tell, could be a new vector in the debate, and mobilise support for further release deals.”
According to a Hamas official who spoke to Al Jazeera this morning, a deal would involve the release of Israeli women and children in exchange for Palestinian women and children held in Israel. AFP reported  that between 50 and 100 hostages – but no military personnel - would be freed in exchange for as many as 300 Palestinians, with a five day pause in fighting on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations in the south of Gaza.
Here are some of the key factors behind such a deal, and what could come next if it is finalised.
***
Is Israel’s position getting weaker?
As the death toll in Gaza mounts, and even Israel’s allies voice concerns over the extent of the devastation for Palestinian civilians, there have been reports in the Israeli media  about divisions among senior ministers. One side believes that the longer and more intense the military campaign, the more concessions Hamas will be forced to make; the other fears that international pressure to end the war is bound to grow, and that the terms of any deal will only get worse.
“My sense is that the Israelis are always trying to get another day, and another day, and another day of operations before agreeing to a deal,” Levy said. “Each day, they hope that they’ve won the lottery and killed [Hamas leaders] Mohammed Deif or Yahya Sinwar and that they will be able to point to a major military success.”
***
Does a deal give Hamas more negotiating power?
Hamas took the hostages in part because it knows the leverage that comes with the high value that Israeli society places on the release of its citizens: the most famous example is the deal struck by Netanyahu for the release of more than 1,000 Palestinian prisoners  in exchange for a single Israeli soldier, Gilad Shalit, in 2011. (One of those prisoners was Sinwar himself.)
By its refusal to accept a deal before now, Israel has kept that leverage to a minimum. “But once that path is taken, Hamas can play that card much more effectively,” Levy said. “They’re not going to roll over for the release of the rest of the prisoners – they’re going to demand as much as they possibly can for each one.”
***
What does Benjamin Netanyahu get out of it?
One reason for Netanyahu’s resistance to a deal may be his understanding that once the war comes to an end, his own position will come under far more urgent scrutiny because of a wide consensus that the failure to protect civilians near the Gaza border was his responsibility. “He is almost certainly toast the morning after the war is over,” said Levy. “The same is probably true of the military leadership, so they have not played the moderating role that they might ordinarily be expected to.”
The families’ march to Jerusalem has heightened that sense of Netanyahu’s responsibility, Levy added. But it’s equally clear that any resolution that ends with the deaths of many of the hostages, or their permanent incarceration in Gaza, will also be laid at the prime minister’s door. “If this ends with none or very few getting out, Netanyahu and his government will of course say that it’s Hamas who are to blame – and it’s true that Hamas is responsible for capturing them. But the Israeli public will know that they were alive, and you chose to let them die. Under those circumstances, it’s remarkable that they’ve resisted pressure for a deal for as long as they have.”
***
Will Israel accept a different victory narrative?
Since 7 October, the Israeli government has been clear that its primary goal is the elimination of Hamas – with the release of the hostages second on its list. But many expert observers view the first aim as either impossible to achieve or moot because the factors that contributed to the Hamas atrocity will simply be heightened.
Even if it was never a realistic goal, so much emphasis has been put on that message that if it changes direction, and puts hostage release first, Israel will need to have a coherent story. “The government has been pushing the idea that it is only military pressure that put a deal on the table in the first place,” Levy said. And yesterday, senior Israeli adviser Mark Regev said that  “the reason people are a bit more upbeat about [a deal] is because Hamas needs a ceasefire. They need some time to rest and regroup.”
That isn’t true, Levy said. “Something very similar was available four weeks ago. But if that’s the narrative that they need to make it viable – that’s fine. They might have preferred not to do the release at all, but if they have to, this is the story that they will push.”
***
Could a pause lead to a more permanent end to hostilities?
If there is a hostage deal, the shape of Israeli public opinion is unpredictable, Levy said. “But if you get 50 or more people out, then a story that has been about death and loss and combat heroics could shift to being a story about lives being resumed, families being reunited, and a desire for more of the same.”
The hope in the United States and elsewhere will be that a pause in hostilities could open a path to further prisoner releases, and that the previous Israeli objectives will be forgotten because of the accompanying public relief. “I think if the Israeli public was told today that a hostage deal would mean a permanent ceasefire, it would be a hard sell,” Levy said. “So the hope is that you can get there surreptitiously, bit by bit, and that a pause in the fighting gathers a momentum of its own.”
For Hamas to countenance more releases, they would need “a guarantee that this wave of the military campaign is over”, Levy said. “It’s not about a commitment that Sinwar and others in the leadership will be able to live out their natural days – they know they can’t get that.” Even if more hostages are released, he added, it is hard to see how the current circumstances would lead to the freeing of every last one, since that would reduce Hamas’ leverage to nil.
“Even if you go much further down this path, you need a credible, workable proposition for how this can be brought to an end,” he said. “Hamas is unlikely to give up whatever final group of Israelis it would be holding without guarantees that Israel would withdraw its military presence from Gaza. It is hard to envisage how one gets to that point.”
                   What else we’ve been reading                                                               As the two-year anniversary of the war in Ukraine nears, Shaun Walker’s dispatch from Kyiv  shows that morale and optimism is waning.Nimo                                                                 Being the youngest of five, I know my fair share about sibling rivalry (illustrated above). Zoe Williams has put together a handy guide on how to navigate  through the trials and tribulations of one of the longest relationships of your life – as a child and a parent!Nazia Parveen, acting deputy newsletters editor                                                                 For the long read, Joshua Leifer profiles Benjamin Netanyahu, exploring how he has taken his country to the right – and how, even if he goes, the approach he established will be very difficult to shift.Archie                                                                 Earlier this month, the fishing town of Grindavik, Iceland, was evacuated as magma rumbled and snaked underground amid thousands of earthquakes. Now as the country braces itself for a volcanic eruption, this National Geographic piece  (£) takes a deep dive into the volcanic activity in the Reykjanes Peninsula and how it represents a new era.Nazia                                                                 If you’re hosting Christmas dinner for the first time this year, I urge you to read Debora Robertson  ’s guide to cooking on the big day without ending up hating everyone.Nimo                                                           Sport                   
                       Football | An own goal by North Macedonia spared England’s blushes as they drew 1-1 in the final game of their Euro 2024 qualification campaign.  Gareth Southgate’s side finish the calendar year with a record of eight wins and two draws from 10 games.
                       Football | Liverpool mayor Steve Rotherham has described Everton’s 10-point deduction  as “wholly disproportionate” and promised to support the club’s appeal. The team were plunged into the relegation zone after being slapped with the heaviest punishment ever given to a Premier League club for breaching financial rules.
                       Golf | Rory McIlroy and Tiger Woods’s indoor golf venture has been postponed  after the purpose-built venue in Florida was damaged. The TGL, a new team golf league, was due to start early next year but has now been pushed back to 2025, after the SoFi Center in Palm Beach Gardens suffered a power cut which deflated parts of the venue’s air-supported dome.
                   The front pages                   
The Guardian ’s top story is “UN sounds alarm as world on track for ‘hellish’ 3C rise in temperatures”. The Times splashes on “WFH push to get more sick Britons off benefits’ and the Telegraph says “Sunak pins hopes on ‘Thatcher’ tax package”.
The i leads with “Sunak’s eat out to help out ‘drove second wave of Covid” and the Independent says “Boris: Let Covid ‘rip’ through UK. Rishi: ‘Just let people die’”. The Sun has an interview with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy, splashing with “Putin has tried to kill me five times”.
The Financial Times headlines “Staff revolt at OpenAI piles pressure on board over move to oust Altman”. The Express leads with “PM: We can and will cut taxes” and the Mirror says “Covid inquiry bombshell, Sunak: let people die”.
                   Today in Focus                   
                     How much legal trouble is Donald Trump in?                   
Various polls have the ex-president as favourite to retake the White House in the US election next year, but he faces growing legal jeopardy. Hugo Lowell reports on the many charges Trump is facing
                   Cartoon of the day | Martin Rowson                   The Upside                   
                     A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad                   
Many people say it would be a “dream” to accomplish a particular goal – for Noreen Davies it actually was.  Twelve years ago, when she was 72, Davies dreamt she was skilfully playing the trombone. When she woke up, she knew she had to learn the instrument. Even though the trombone is notoriously difficult to learn how to play, Davies has mastered the instrument and spends her time gigging throughout the West Midlands with groups exploring everything from the blues to vintage jazz and big band funk.
The open world of jam sessions and gigs has led Davies to pick up more instruments: she now plays the piano, the accordion, the washboard, the baritone ukulele and is learning to play the bass ukulele. “Playing music and improvising with other people is essential to me now,” she says. “Everyone should try it out – just get yourself to a jam session somewhere and see what happens. I’m glad I had my dream.”
Sign up here  for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday                   
                   Bored at work?                   
And finally, the Guardian’s puzzles are here to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow.
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword Wordiply

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Scottish Labour backs calls for full ceasefire in Israel-Hamas war
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:43 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITICS; Version:2
Length: 678 words
Byline: Severin Carrell Scotland editor
Highlight: MSPs support motion by first minister, Humza Yousaf, calling for immediate truce in the conflict
Body


Scottish Labour has formally backed demands for a full ceasefire in Israel’s bombardment of Gaza, widening the party’s divisions  on the conflict.
Anas Sarwar supported a motion tabled by Scotland’s first minister, Humza Yousaf, in Holyrood on Tuesday calling for an immediate truce, in defiance of Keir Starmer’s instruction that Labour should only support “pauses” to allow evacuations and aid to arrive.
Sarwar then directly criticised Benjamin Netanyahu’s refusal to consider the full cessation of military action in Gaza. Sarwar told MSPs he believed the Israeli prime minister “has no interest in peace”, implying he needed to be removed from power for lasting peace to be achieved. A total of 21 Labour MSPs backed the SNP motion, which was carried by 90 votes to 28.
The coalition between Labour and the Scottish National party at Holyrood echoed last week’s revolt in the Commons when 56 Labour MPs, including eight frontbenchers, broke the party whip  to support an SNP motion at Westminster calling for a ceasefire.
Sarwar has repeatedly urged Starmer to take a far tougher line on Israel’s retaliation after Hamas’s atrocities on 7 October, openly distancing himself from Starmer’s refusal to support UN calls for a full ceasefire. 
On Tuesday Scottish Labour MSPs supported Yousaf’s motion endorsing demands by António Guterres, the UN’s secretary general, for an immediate cessation of violence to allow civilians to escape the war zone and for humanitarian aid to be delivered.
 Tomorrow @ScottishLabour  will vote for an immediate ceasefire. Here I explain why and what I believe needs to happen to make it a reality. pic.twitter.com/cgiuWy6ljf  — Anas Sarwar (@AnasSarwar) November 20, 2023
Sarwar’s amendment went further by regretting that Netanyahu had said “he will not even consider a ceasefire”. It used stronger language than Starmer’s motion last week by urging the international criminal court to investigate the conduct of both Hamas and Israel.
However, the Labour amendment included the qualification that “in order for any ceasefire to work, it requires all sides to comply”, noting that Hamas had stated it would repeat its attacks on Israeli civilians and would continue its rocket fire, if it could.
The debate at Holyrood opened with Yousaf, whose mother-in-law and father-in-law were trapped in Gaza before escaping on 3 November, urging Starmer and Rishi Sunak, the prime minister, to officially recognise Palestine as an independent state.
In a bid to maintain a consensus with rival parties, Yousaf did not name Starmer directly but implicitly criticised the Labour leader when he said a humanitarian pause would be “simply a pause in the killing of innocent men, women, and children, only to resume hours later. Surely, we can and must strive for better than that”.
Sarwar said he was clear that both sides in the conflict had breached international law. “We must stay true to an international rules-based system and everyone’s actions must be judged to make sure that they’re in proper accordance with that international humanitarian law,” he said.
A leaked recording revealed Sarwar told Muslim activists in the party last month he was dismayed when Starmer appeared to give Israel carte blanche to attack fuel, food and water supplies in Gaza during a radio interview in mid-October – a position Starmer then clarified.
Starmer and Sarwar are generally very close allies but Sarwar, one of the party’s most prominent Muslims, believes Starmer is wrong on principle and is worried about the impact his stance on Gaza will have on Muslim support  for the party at the next election.
In an interview with Sky News , Elizabeth El-Nakla, Yousaf’s mother-in-law, said she and her husband, Maged, who is Palestinian, believed they could die each night as Israeli shells and bombs devastated their neighbourhood. The house next door was hit in one attack.
“On many nights I would sit on the edge of my bed and I would self-soothe myself and rock for six/seven hours,” El-Nakla said. “And when that sun rose in the morning, you were so glad to be alive.”

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Susan Sarandon dropped by talent agency after remarks at pro-Palestine rally
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 9:40 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FILM; Version:5
Length: 711 words
Byline: Adrian Horton
Highlight: UTA lets Oscar-winning actor go after she spoke at several pro-Palestine rallies
Body


The Hollywood talent agency UTA has dropped Susan Sarandon as a client after she spoke at a pro-Palestine rally over the weekend, a spokesperson for the agency confirmed to Deadline. 
The Oscar-winning actor attended several rallies in support of Palestine and drew criticism for saying: “There are a lot of people afraid of being Jewish at this time, and are getting a taste of what it feels like to be a Muslim in this country.”
In remarks captured on video , Sarandon encouraged others to keep speaking up in support of Palestinians in the Israel-Hamas war. “People are questioning, people are standing up, people are educating themselves, people are stepping away from brainwashing that started when they were kids,” said Sarandon at the rally. She encouraged attendees to “be strong, be patient, be clear and stand with anybody who has the courage to speak out” and thanked “the Jewish community who’s come out to have our backs”.
Sarandon went on to repost a pro-Palestinian message from Pink Floyd’s Roger Waters on X, formerly known as Twitter. Waters has been criticized over the years for alleged antisemitic remarks, although he has always rejected those claims, previously saying: “I have spent my entire life speaking out against authoritarianism and oppression wherever I see it. When I was a child after the war, the name of Anne Frank was often spoken in our house, she became a permanent reminder of what happens when fascism is left unchecked. My parents fought the Nazis in World War II, with my father paying the ultimate price.”
Since the Hamas attack on 7 October that killed at least 1,200 Israelis and led to hundreds being taken hostage, more than 14,000 people have been killed in the Israeli assault on Gaza, including at least 5,600 children, according to Hamas-run health authorities.
Sarandon is the latest public figure to find themselves in hot water over their stance on the war, particularly in support of Palestine.  Scream VI star Melissa Barrera, who was lined up to play the lead in the upcoming Scream VII, was fired from the film on Tuesday by the production company Spyglass; the company told Variety  they removed her from the film due to some social media posts that had been interpreted as antisemitic.
Barrera has been posting on her Instagram about her support for Palestine and described Israel as committing “genocide”, and “brutally killing innocent Palestinians, mothers and children, under the pretence of destroying Hamas”.
“Western media only shows the [Israeli] side. Why do they do that, I will let you deduce for yourself,” she wrote on 22 October, adding: “We don’t need more hate. No Islamophobia. No Anti-semitism [sic].”
The Guardian has not confirmed which posts Spyglass was referring to.  Barrera has yet to respond to requests for comment.
Last month, Maha Dakhil, the co-head of film at Hollywood powerhouse agency CAA, faced internal backlash and resigned from the agency’s board after she reposted an image on Instagram that read, in part: “You’re currently learning who supports genocide.”
Dakhil added the caption: “That’s the line for me.” She then posted a second image that read: “What’s more heartbreaking than witnessing genocide? Witnessing the denial that genocide is happening.”
The posts prompted the screenwriter Aaron Sorkin, one of Dakhil and CAA’s prominent clients, to publicly denounce her words and leave the agency for rival William Morris Endeavor Entertainment (WME). “Maha isn’t an antisemite, she’s just wrong. She’s a great agent and I’m very proud of the work we did together over the last six years,” Sorkin said in a statement to Variety.
Dakhil has since deleted both images and made a public apology. “I made a mistake with a repost in my Instagram story, which used hurtful language. Like so many of us, I have been reeling with heartbreak. I pride myself on being on the side of humanity and peace,” Dakhil said in a statement to Variety. 
“I’m so grateful to Jewish friends and colleagues who pointed out the implications and further educated me. I immediately took the repost down. I’m sorry for the pain I have caused,” she said.
Sarandon reportedly signed with UTA in 2014. She appeared this year in the movies Blue Beetle and Maybe I Do, and did a handful of television appearances.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Why is Qatar often a mediator and what is its role in Israel-Hamas war?
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 2:31 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 915 words
Byline: Patrick Wintour Diplomatic editor
Highlight: Qatar is mediating a potential truce agreement between the two sides involving the release of hostagesIsrael-Hamas war: live updates
Body


                   Why does Qatar mediate in so many conflicts?                   
Many countries in the Middle East aspire to the role of mediators – Egypt, Oman and Kuwait among them – but Qatar presents itself as the region’s primary problem solver and advocate of dialogue. It has been active in Ukraine, Lebanon, Sudan, Iran, Afghanistan and Gaza, in the process hosting the leadership of the Taliban and the political wing of Hamas among others. 
Observers say Qatar takes on this role since as a small but fabulously wealthy country built on vast supplies of liquid gas, it needs to make itself indispensable to the international community and protected from unwelcome interventions by its larger neighbours, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The 2017-2021 boycott of Qatar led by Saudi Arabia showed it has good reasons to be fearful.
                   Is there opposition to its role in the Israel-Hamas conflict?                   
Yes, on the American right and in parts of Israel. The North Carolina Republican senator Ted Budd said on X this week: “For weeks, Qatar’s foreign ministry has claimed to ‘be close’ to negotiating a deal for the release of hostages held by Hamas – including American hostages. How long will Qatar continue to host terrorists with American blood on their hands?”
Gershon Baskin, an Israeli hostage negotiator who has dealt directly with Hamas, challenged Qatar at a recent Middle East Institute seminar. “In my mind, Qatar is a state that supports terrorism and they need to be called to order,” he said. Noting that the largest US military base in the region was in Qatar, he said: “The Americans need to tell Qatar if you don’t force Hamas to release hostages, you are going to exile them from Qatar.”
Baskin is one of those who think Egyptian intelligence has better lines into Hamas than Qatar, and Qatar does not have the same lines into Israeli intelligence. Such criticism puts a lot of pressure on Qatar to deliver, both to show its independence from Hamas and its effectiveness. Indeed, the surprise statement on Sunday  by the Qatari prime minister that Qatar was close to a deal may have reflected a need to challenge the gathering scepticism of Qatar in the US Congress.
Qatar argues that some its critics misunderstand why it hosts Hamas’s political leaders – which is not so much out of ideological sympathy but because the US has asked it to.
It is argued that its role is distinct from the technical role that the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) can undertake and the message-carrying role that Switzerland undertakes for the US in Tehran. It requires a degree of political trust, knowledge and political sensitivity. Just as the US does not mount much public criticism of Israel, neither does Qatar of Hamas. The precondition of influence sometimes is discretion.
                   Where does Qatar stand on the conflict?                   
Qatar does not endorse the Hamas attack on Israel on 7 October but says the responsibility lies with Israel due to the occupation. At a recent Organisation of Islamic Cooperation summit, it was arguing for tougher messages than condemnation of Israel, and since then it has accused Israel of genocide, breaches of the Geneva conventions and massacres. It has also laid into what it sees as double standards on the part of some in the international community.
Qatar has tried to influence Iran not to escalate the conflict. If there has been a common denominator in Qatar’s stance, it has been one of de-escalation.
                   Why are hostage talks proving so difficult?                   
At one level this is a technical exchange of political prisoners and as such a routine confidence-building measure in a conflict. The identity of those being swapped, the criteria, location and method of transfer have to be agreed. In this instance, it has been agreed for more than two weeks that women and children will be the first released on both sides. The lists are compiled by the ICRC.
But this is more complex because it is linked to a humanitarian pause that requires discussion about the number of border crossings opened, the aid that will be permitted to enter, the conduct of Israeli checkpoints, coordination of aid and the level of military deconfliction. As Baskin points out, for Israel this is an unusual kind of negotiation since it is negotiating indirectly with the people it has said it intends to continue fighting. Since the outcome of this conflict could determine the future of the Middle East for generations to come, no one wants to give premature ground.
                   What about the other hostages?                   
Even if the deal happens, Hamas will retain as many as 150 hostages and it will want another pool of its prisoners held in Israeli jails released. About 7,000 Palestinians are imprisoned, 559 of these serving life sentences for murdering Israelis. In addition there are roughly 130 of the terrorists who were caught inside Israel on 7 October. A third of the prisoners are members of Hamas, and only about 400 of the 7,000 come from Gaza, with the vast majority coming from the West Bank. The majority are serving sentences for things like belonging to a terrorist organisation or throwing stones or molotov cocktails. Or they are administrative detainees – in other words, they were arrested by Israel without charge and imprisoned without trial.
Securing their release, and the release of the remaining Israels, will be much harder.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Netanyahu meeting with ministers amid signs hostage deal to be approved
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:45 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 725 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: ‘I hope there will be good news soon’, says Israeli PM of potential deal for release of some of those held by HamasIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Benjamin Netanyahu was meeting his most senior ministers on Tuesday evening amid strong indications his government was due to approve a deal for the release of some of the more than 240 mostly Israeli hostages held by Hamas in Gaza.
“We are making progress. I don’t think it’s worth saying too much, not at even this moment, but I hope there will be good news soon,” the Israeli prime minister, told reservists during a visit to an army base on Tuesday afternoon, but did not provide further details.
Netanyahu’s office said that “in light of developments in the matter of the release of our hostages” Israel’s war cabinet would be convened followed by meetings of his wider security cabinet and the full cabinet.
Israeli media reported that the deal would result in 50 hostages, all women or children, being freed in return for the return of 150 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails, also all women or children. The deal would also result in a pause in hostilities for at least five days, restrictions on Israeli surveillance of Gaza and additional aid sent into the territory, the newspaper Haaretz said. 
There was no confirmation of the reports but a source close to the negotiations who briefed Reuters outlined similar details. So did a senior Hamas official who spoke to Al Jazeera, the Qatar-based TV network.
Joe Biden on Tuesday also said a deal was close. “My team is in the region shuttling between capitals. We’re now very close, very close, to bringing some of these hostages home very soon. But I don’t want to get into the details because nothing is done until it’s done,” Biden told reporters.
Earlier in the day, Ismail Haniyeh, the most senior political leader of Hamas, said a truce agreement with Israel was near. “We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, and the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators.
Qatar, where Hamas has a political office, has been the main intermediary between Israel and Hamas, though Egypt and others have played a role.
The hostages were seized on 7 October when Hamas launched attacks into Israel that killed more than 1,200 people, mostly civilians, in their homes or at a dance party.
Observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse. Analysts also point out that any deal agreed by the political leadership of Hamas overseas would have to be acceptable to political and military leaders in Gaza.
Any deal would be a significant propaganda coup for Hamas and a personal victory for Yahya Sinwar, the Hamas leader in Gaza , who spent 23 years in Israeli prisons before being released in an exchange in 2011. Sinwar tops Israel’s hitlist and his whereabouts is unknown, but his consent is essential for any agreement to be meaningful.
Netanyahu is under domestic pressure to get the hostages freed but any deal risks triggering a political crisis. Several far-right parties that are part of the ruling coalition on Tuesday evening called for the proposed deal to be rejected and the Israeli offensive in Gaza to be intensified to secure better terms.
More than 12,000 people have been killed in Gaza, according to Hamas-run health authorities, since the offensive was launched days after the 7 October attacks. 
In a sign it was expecting hostages to return soon, Netanyahu’s office said it was convening the directors general of all the relevant government ministries to prepare for treatment and aid, in light of the latest developments.
Kamelia Hoter Ishay, the grandmother of 13-year-old Gali Tarshansky, who is believed to be being held in Gaza, said she was trying not to follow all the deal reports because she was afraid of being disappointed. “The only thing I am waiting for is the phone call from my daughter, Reuma, who will say: ‘Gali is coming back.’ And then I’ll know that it’s really over and I can breathe a sigh of relief and say that’s it, it’s over.”
Gali was kidnapped from her home in Be’eri kibbutz, one of the communities attacked by Hamas.
Not all of the hostages are being held by Hamas, with some in the hands of Palestinian Islamic Jihad, a separate extremist faction, and criminals in Gaza, Israeli and other officials say.
Four of the hostages held by Hamas were released early in the conflict, while two have been found dead and one, a soldier, has been rescued.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




‘Why can’t I get them out?’: Palestinian Americans who fled Gaza devastated over leaving family behind
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 12:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:2
Length: 1164 words
Byline: Erum Salam in New York
Highlight: US officials say they have helped nearly 800 citizens leave the territory, but more than 1,200 with ties to the country remain behind
Body


The day after the border between Gaza and Egypt opened, the Abushaabans left the Khan Younis refugee camp and headed for the Rafah crossing.
With the crackle and thump of gunfire and airstrikes in the distance, the two women walked south, praying that their names were on a list of American nationals allowed to enter Egypt and that they would soon be able to go back to their home in Houston, Texas.
Half of those prayers was answered. The elder Abushaaban was on the list, but her 20-year-old daughter was not.
Thinking it was surely a clerical error, they contacted Maria Kari, one of dozens of US-based immigration lawyers who have been lobbying the state department and congressional representatives to help US families trapped in Gaza return home.
But when the Abushaabans reached Rafah, it became clear there was no hope. The elder of the two – who have both asked not to be named – had to make a decision: enter Egypt alone and hope her daughter soon be allowed to follow or return together into the humanitarian crisis that is Gaza and wait until both of their names were on the list.
The younger Abushaaban, a kinesiology student at the University of Houston, speaks no Arabic and had only visited Gaza a handful of times before this trip.
“She’s this 20-year-old girl who went with her mom to this part of the world that she cannot navigate on her own,” Kari said. “How on earth could they be separating families? This is not the Trump administration. We don’t separate families at the border.”
Despite the pain from a foot which had swollen from the many miles she had walked, the elder Abushaaban chose to stay in Gaza with her daughter. And after another 24 hours of frantic calls between Kari, the family and the state department, both mother and daughter were permitted to cross the border the next day.
US officials say they have helped some 800 US citizens leave Gaza, where fighting has raged since Hamas attacked Israel on 7 October, killing at least 1,200 people and taking nearly 240 hostage, and Israel launched its campaign against Gaza in response, killing more than 12,000 people, more than 5,000 of whom are children.
But more than 1,200 people with ties to the US – including citizens, green card-holders and their families – remain trapped in the embattled territory.
And for those without connections to the US or other countries, there is no immediate hope of escape. Joe Biden is facing growing calls to back a ceasefire, but although the US president says he is “heartbroken” by the deaths of “many thousands of civilians, including children”, he has yet to echo the calls for a halt in the violence. A ceasefire would only help Hamas, he argues.
The Abushaabans had left Texas for Gaza in August, excited to catch up with relatives. But what was supposed to be a joyful holiday, became a waking nightmare.
When Israeli military officials issued a sweeping evacuation order for nearly half of Gaza’s 2.3 million people to move south or else risk being killed, the Abushaabans initially sought shelter at the Khan Younis refugee camp.
But as the siege continued, conditions became increasingly grim. Food, water and electricity became scarce and all the while Israel was still bombing Gaza from the land, sea and air.
The Abushaabans’ only connection to the outside world was via WhatsApp – and only when there was limited access to the internet. The communication blackouts in the territory meant they had to decide each day whether to call Kari to discuss their attempts to escape, or dial their family, knowing that any conversation might be their last.
From Texas, Abushaaban’s other daughter Mai, 22, worked tirelessly, contacting the state department and immigration attorneys like Kari, to help bring her mother and sister home. Her efforts were not in vain and on 7 November, she was reunited with her mother and sister.
When she finally saw them again, Mai said she couldn’t believe they were actually in front of her.
“I just kept touching my sister, her hair, her face,” she said. “This is essentially a second chance at life.”
Back in Texas, the two women are still wrestling with the emotional toll of their ordeal and neither felt ready to speak to a reporter about their grueling experience, said Mai. Both are showing signs of survivor’s guilt and have expressed a desire to go back for the people they had to leave behind.
All three women are haunted by the fate of their relatives who remain trapped in Gaza, Mai said.
“My mom and sister are just traumatized from what they had to go through,” she said. “They feel guilty for even having that privilege to be able to leave and to know there’s other people who want to leave and they just can’t, including our loved ones.”
Many others who escaped Gaza are wrestling with the same agony of leaving relatives behind.
Naela Elshorafa, 66, of Camarillo, California, was visiting her ailing 85-year-old mother when the war broke out. She spent 33 traumatic days in the territory before she was finally able to reach Egypt and then travel home to California.
In a Zoom interview, she apologized for her raspy voice, the result of what she believes was Israel’s use of white phosphorus artillery shells.
“Look what happened to me from the chemicals. I am very sick,” Elshorafa said. “Whenever they [were] bombing us, you hear and see the smoke. And you start to smell it. Phosphorus, they said.”
Human Rights Watch has confirmed  Israel deployed white phosphorus, which can cause horrific burns and respiratory damage.
Before she crossed the border Elshorafa was sheltering in a house with 50 others. There was only one bathroom. Back home in California, she still feels guilty for being able to brush her teeth and take a shower, she said.
Elshorafa is safe, happy to see her children and play with her baby grandson again. But she too remains overwhelmed with concern for her immediate family members still trapped in the war zone. Many of her siblings and cousins – including her sister Nadia and their 85-year-old mother – remain in Gaza.
Because none are US citizens, their chances to leave Gaza are slim to none.
“I am American. I am [an] American citizen. I have the right to take my mom out,” Elshorafa said. “I try to connect with the media and the government and try to get my family out. This is what I’m looking for. I want my family out. Why can’t I get my family out?”
In April 2022, the Biden administration announced Uniting for Ukraine , a program that allows Ukrainian nationals fleeing Russia’s war against Ukraine to come to the US temporarily, so long as they had a US national family member that could support them.
The Biden administration has not afforded the same option to Palestinians fleeing Israel’s war against Gaza, which greatly frustrates many Palestinian Americans like Elshorafa, especially since her mother was suffering from a lung infection when she left and her medication supply was dwindling.
“Now what comes to my mind is [whether] I get them out or not. Or is it gonna be too late?”

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Afternoon Update: Hamas says truce is close; man charged with raping 90-year-old woman; and essential workers in rental stress
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:46 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1035 words
Byline: Antoun Issa
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Afternoon Update here, and start your day with our Morning Mail newsletter.
Body


Good afternoon. The Coalition have been on the attack since the high court ruled indefinite immigration detention was unlawful, describing the cohort affected as “hardened criminals”.
But it turns out five of the 93 people eligible for release under the ruling had already been released  by the Morrison government.
A home affairs document, published by the high court today, also confirms that not all the 93 had convictions in Australia.
                   Top news                                                                   Hamas chief says ‘we are                           close to reaching a truce agreement’ | Hamas political bureau chief, Ismail Haniyeh, has told  Reuters that the militant group is approaching an agreement with Israel in Qatari-led negotiations. Israeli forces continued  their offensive in northern Gaza, closing in on the Indonesian hospital where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks. There were also reports  of an Israeli raid in the West Bank city of Hebron, and the arrest  of celebrated Palestinian poet, Mosab Abu Taha, in Gaza. Yemen’s Houthis have released a video  of their capture of what they said was an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea. Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.                                                                     RBA keeps eye on Middle East tensions | The Reserve Bank considered leaving the cash rate  unchanged this month, noting uncertainties including how the “escalation of tensions in the Middle East” was “likely to dampen consumer confidence and global demand”. The RBA ultimately decided to lift the cash rate on 7 November to reduce the risk of a “larger monetary policy response” in coming months.                                                                                                           Robbie Williams fan dies after Sydney concert fall | A woman in her 70s has died after an induced coma  after falling down six rows of seating at Allianz Stadium in Moore Park on Thursday evening.                                                                     Man charged with raping 90-year-old woman | Police allege a 34-year-old man broke into an aged care home  at Bateau Bay on the NSW Central Coast about 12.40am last Wednesday before attacking the woman. The sex crimes squad commander, Jayne Doherty, said it was “horrendous that someone, any person in the safety of their home, would be attacked like this, but to [allegedly] attack a very defenceless old lady is beyond belief”.                                                                                                           Beijing rejects Australian claims China sonar injured navy divers | The Chinese government has accused the federal government  of “making trouble” with “rude and irresponsible” claims about the sonar incident that injured Australian navy divers last week. The Australian defence minister, Richard Marles, said on Saturday that several divers from the HMAS Toowoomba sustained injuries from sonar pulses emitted by a Chinese warship in international waters off Japan.                                                                     Essential workers pushed into serious rental stress | Essential workers can’t afford  rent in any part of the country, a new heat map  from Anglicare Australia shows. The cost-of-living crisis around the world has also fuelled  a growing appetite for instant ramen, our Tokyo correspondent reports.                                                                                                           Lachlan Murdoch meets Volodymyr Zelenskiy | The media mogul met the Ukrainian president  in Kyiv, in a sign of support for the country. Meanwhile, a second ex-Australian soldier is reported to have died  last month while fighting against invading Russian forces.                                                                     Fears of abortion setback in Argentina | Javier Milei, the newly elected far-right president often compared to Donald Trump, has previously vowed  to repeal country’s 2020 landmark legalisation of abortion and shutter the ministry of women, gender and diversity.                                                           Full Story                   
                     The climate scientists who saw the crisis coming – Weight of the world, part 1                   
In the first of this three-part series, pioneering Australian climate scientists reveal the moment they realised the planet was heading for catastrophe. Click here to listen to the 36-minute episode. 
                   What they said …                   
***
“So-called blue hydrogen is a fake and making the climate worse.” – Andrew Forrest
The billionaire miner used his opening address  at Fortescue’s annual general meeting to criticise the gas industry by denouncing the ongoing use of fossil fuels.
                   In numbers                   
According to NBC, the US president, Joe Biden, is suffering over  economic conditions at home and policy choices abroad, prominently including support for Israel in its war with Hamas. Among those to lose faith with Biden is rapper Cardi B, who said in an  Instagram live stream she was done with the US president over his support for Ukraine and Israel.
                   Before bed read                   
Journalist Elle Hunt is 32, single and wondering whether she will regret not having children.
“I’ve felt keen resentment that men are granted the luxury of a longer window in which to decide, and left to do so on their own terms. And I’ve felt daunted by the decades that lie ahead, if I do indeed remain child-free: how will I generate meaning and momentum, entirely on my own steam?” Read the story. 
                   Daily word game                   
Today’s starter word is: FUND.  You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. 
                   Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know. Sign up for our Morning Mail newsletter here. 

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




First Thing: Hamas ‘close’ to truce agreement with Israel, leader says
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 11:25 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1894 words
Byline: Nicola Slawson
Highlight: Deal could include limited ceasefire and exchange of Israeli hostages for Palestinian prisoners. Plus, most US gun deaths are suicides. How can they be prevented?
Body


Good morning.
Ismail Haniyeh, the most senior political leader of Hamas, has said a truce agreement with Israel may be close , raising hopes of a pause in the Israeli offensive in Gaza and the release of at least some of the Israeli hostages the militant organisation is holding there.
“We are close to reaching a deal on a truce,” Haniyeh said, adding the group had delivered its response to Qatari mediators.
Senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, have all suggested in recent days that an agreement is near, although observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse.
Analysts also point out that any deal agreed by the political leadership of Hamas overseas would have to be acceptable to political and military leaders in Gaza.
                                                                                        What could the agreement consist of? Two sources familiar with the truce talks told Agence France-Presse a tentative deal included a five-day truce , comprising a ceasefire on the ground and limits to Israeli air operations over southern Gaza. In return, between 50 and 100 prisoners held by Hamas and Islamic Jihad – a separate Palestinian militant group – would be released. They would include Israeli civilians and captives of other nationalities, but no military personnel.                                                                                          What has Israel said? Israel’s national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, issued a statement this morning warning against a deal. Yesterday he was involved in angry exchanges with families  of those being held hostage by Hamas.                                                                                Court rules that only US government can sue to enforce Voting Rights Act                                      
A federal appeals court shocked voting rights groups  yesterday with a ruling that only the US government, not outside groups or citizens, could sue to enforce the Voting Rights Act’s provisions.
The civil rights law, which outlaws racial discrimination as it relates to voting, has typically been enforced by lawsuits from these groups, not by the government itself. Now that the Republican-appointed eighth circuit court of appeals has made the ruling by 2-1, this “private right of action” to enforce section 2 of the law is called into question.
The ruling stemmed from a case brought by the Arkansas State Conference NAACP and Arkansas Public Policy Panel over new maps created during redistricting that the two groups allege diluted the voting power of Black voters in the state.
                                                                                        How did the judges make the decision? While courts at all levels have allowed private claims seeking to enforce the voting rights law for decades, this is an “assumption that rests on flimsy footing”, according to the opinion written by Judge David Stras, who was appointed by Donald Trump. The ruling dissected the law itself, finding it did not include specific language that allows anyone aside from the attorney general to bring enforcement action.                                                                                          What happens next? It is expected there will be an appeal to the supreme court over the ruling.                                                                                OpenAI staff threaten to quit en masse unless Sam Altman is reinstated                                      
Turmoil has engulfed the company behind ChatGPT after hundreds of OpenAI staff members threatened to quit en masse  unless the board overseeing the business reinstates its ousted chief executive, Sam Altman, and steps down.
In an open letter,  nearly all of OpenAI’s 700 employees demanded the resignation of the board and said they may walk out if Altman is not brought back.
Altman was fired on Friday in a move that shocked Silicon Valley, riled the company’s employees and put rival tech companies on alert for a talent exodus, although Microsoft – a major investor in OpenAI – quickly snapped some up.
Monday’s letter to OpenAI’s four remaining board directors said: “Your actions have made it obvious that you are incapable of overseeing OpenAI. We are unable to work for or with people that lack competence, judgment and care for our mission and employees.” The board’s members have yet to comment publicly.
                                                                                        What is OpenAI? It was founded as a non-profit entity. It controls a commercial subsidiary that until Friday was run by Altman. The 38-year-old has become a globally renowned executive off the back of the success of ChatGPT, the AI text-generating system that raced to 100 million users soon after its launch in November last year.                                                                                In other news …                                                                                                           The first images emerged on Tuesday of 41 men trapped for more than a week  in a highway tunnel in the Indian Himalayas, showing                         some of them standing in the confined space and communicating with rescue workers.  The men have been stuck in the 3-mile (4.5km) tunnel in Uttarakhand state since it caved in early on 12 November.                                                                                          The social media platform X yesterday sued media watchdog group Media Matters, alleging the organization defamed the platform  after it published a report that said ads for major brands had appeared next to posts touting                         nazism. Media Matters’ report led IBM, Comcast and several other advertisers to pull ads from the platform.                                                                                          Storms and inclement weather this Thanksgiving holiday week are likely to disrupt travel plans  for much of the US.  The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) said it expected “this holiday travel season to be the busiest ever”.                                                                                          A Los Angeles judge ruled                         there                         was enough evidence for A$AP Rocky to stand trial  on charges that he fired a gun at a former friend and collaborator on the streets near a Hollywood hotel in 2021.  Rocky has pleaded not guilty to two felony counts of assault with a semiautomatic firearm.                                                                                Don’t miss this:                     people say you’ll know – but will I regret not having children?                                      
As a thirtysomething woman, the question of children – to have, or not to have – is one I’ll carry until, one way or the other, the train leaves the station for good, writes Elle Hunt.  I can count on one hand those friends who have always been certain that they want children. Now, they have them. The rest seem mired in uncertainty, waiting for the opportunity to arise – or pass. Even decisions don’t seem to readily stick. All my life I’ve felt fairly sure that I don’t want children of my own. This is convenient, given that I’m 32 and single. And yet, without my bringing it up, the question seems to keep rebounding on me, like signposts along a highway warning of the last chance to turn: am I sure ?
                                        … or this:                     the majority of US gun deaths are suicides. Here’s how to prevent them                                      
In 2022, the number of US gun suicides reached an all-time high: 73 people dying by gun suicide every day, or a total of nearly 27,000 deaths that year. Despite years of intense debate over gun violence in the US, this central fact still receives little attention: most of the country’s gun deaths are suicides, not homicides. Experts say stigma and misinformation are still getting in the way of preventing more of these deaths.  Paul Nestadt, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University, spoke to the Guardian about the country’s rising number of suicides, the role of guns and mental health – and what works to save lives.
                                        Help us raise $1.5m to fund independent journalism in 2024                                      
As we head into 2024, the Guardian’s journalists are already hard at work preparing for one of the most consequential news cycles of our lifetimes. We need your support to raise $1.5m to fund our reporting into areas such as: the 2024 election and the potential for another Trump presidency; continued war in the Middle East; the sweeping implications of artificial intelligence; the climate crisis; and investigations into high-stakes abuses of power. If you value our reporting, please make a year-end gift today.  We’re depending on you.
                                        Climate check:                     revealed – the huge climate impact of the middle classes                                      
The richest 10% of people in many countries cause up to 40 times more climate-heating carbon emissions than the poorest 10% of their fellow citizens, according to data obtained by the Guardian. Failing to account for this huge divide when making policies to cut emissions can cause a backlash over the affordability of climate action, experts say. The world’s richest 10% encompasses most of the middle classes in developed countries – anyone paid more than about $40,000 (£32,000) a year. The lavish lifestyles of the very rich – the 1% – attract attention. But the 10% are responsible for half of all global emissions , making them key to ending the climate crisis.
                                        Last Thing:                     caught not quite in the act – church cameras reveal bat sex ritual                                      
It was the surveillance cameras trained on the dark corners of St Matthias church in the village of Castenray in the Netherlands that caught the creatures in the act. The video footage is in black and white, the animals are entwined and upside down, and the events that unfold against a metal grill are more frantic than romantic. But the recording may nonetheless prompt the rewriting of textbooks. Researchers believe the film of serotine bats is the first documented evidence of any mammal mating without intromission.  In plain English, that’s having sex without penetration.
Scientists have long been stumped by sex in serotine bats, or Eptesicus serotinus. The reasons become obvious from a glance at their anatomy. The male’s erect penis is enormous and ends with a heart-shaped head that is seven times wider than the female’s vagina.
                                        Sign up                                      
First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. 
                                        Get in touch                                      
If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Are social media giants silencing online content?
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 12:37 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: TECHNOLOGY; Version:1
Length: 1360 words
Byline: Kari Paul
Highlight: As violence on the ground continues, emotions on social media are higher than ever – with critics asking if platforms need more transparency around their algorithms Don’t get TechScape delivered to your inbox? Sign up here
Body


As the ongoing conflict between Israel and Hamas and its devastating effects play out in real time on social media, users are continuing to criticise tech firms for what they say is unfair content censorship – pulling into sharp focus longstanding concerns about the opaque algorithms that shape our online worlds.
From the early days of the conflict, social media users have expressed outrage  at allegedly uneven censorship of pro-Palestinian content on platforms like Instagram and Facebook. Meta has denied intentionally suppressing the content, saying that with more posts going up about the conflict, “content that doesn’t violate our policies may be removed in error”.
But a third-party investigation (commissioned by Meta last year and conducted by the independent consultancy Business for Social Responsibility) had previously determined Meta had violated Palestinian human rights by censoring content  related to Israel’s attacks on Gaza in 2021, and incidents in recent weeks have revealed further issues with Meta’s algorithmic moderation. Instagram’s automated translation feature mistakenly added  the word “terrorist” to Palestinian profiles and WhatsApp, also owned by Meta, created auto-generated illustrations of gun-wielding children  when prompted with the word “Palestine”. Meanwhile, in recent days, prominent Palestinian voices  say they are finding their content or accounts limited.
As the violence on the ground continues, emotions are higher than ever – intensifying frustration with these decisions and building pressure on an already volatile situation, digital rights groups and human rights advocates say.
“When it feels like platforms are limiting certain viewpoints, it fans the flames of division and tension because people on all sides of the issue are worried their content is being targeted,” said Nora Benavidez , senior counsel at media watchdog group Free Press. “This kind of worry and paranoia played out across communities helps to create environments that are electric and combustible.”
The moderation disaster unfolding around the Israel-Palestine conflict is renewing calls for more transparency around algorithms, and could bolster support for related legislation. There have long been legislative efforts to address the issue, though none have been successful. The latest attempt is the Platform Accountability and Transparency Act, first announced  in 2021 and reintroduced in June 2023, which would require platforms to explain how their algorithmic recommendations work and provide statistics on content moderation actions.
A similar bill in the US, Protecting Americans from Dangerous Algorithms Act, was introduced in 2021 but was not passed. Such legislation is in keeping with recommendations from experts and advocates, like Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen, who in 2021 urged  senators to create a government agency that could audit the inner workings of social media firms.
Groups including 7amleh  – the Arab Center for Advancement of Social Media and the Electronic Frontier Foundation  (EFF) have also called on platforms to stop unjustified take-downs of content and to provide more transparency around their policies.
“Social media is a crucial means of communication in times of conflict – it’s where communities connect to share updates, find help, locate loved ones, and reach out to express grief, pain, and solidarity,” said the EFF. “Unjustified takedowns during crises like the war in Gaza deprives people of their right to freedom of expression and can exacerbate humanitarian suffering.”
                   Twitter’s moderation problem                   
While Instagram, Facebook, and TikTok have been under fire for their handling of Palestine-related content, X is facing its own issues after Elon Musk supported  an antisemitic  tweet and the platform has been criticised for anti-Islamic and antisemitic content.
Musk came under fire for publicly agreeing with a tweet accusing Jewish people of “hatred against whites” – a move that will not only impact the company itself but also represents “major societal danger”, said Jasmine Enberg, principal analyst at market research firm Insider Intelligence. “Twitter’s influence has always been larger than its user base and ad revenues and, while the platform’s cultural relevance has declined, Musk and X are still very much a major part of public conversation,” she said.
Meanwhile, a study from advocacy group Media Matters showed that  advertisements from companies including Apple and Oracle were placed on X next to antisemitic material. It also showed advertisements from NBC Universal and Amazon were placed next to white nationalist hashtags. A separate study  from the Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) found that of a sample of 200 posts on X containing hate speech towards Muslims or Jews, the company removed just four – or two per cent.
On Monday, X responded to Media Matters and its report with a lawsuit claiming the group had defamed the platform. As Reuters reported , X is claiming that Media Matters “manipulated” the platform by cherry-picking accounts known to follow fringe content “until it found ads next to extremist posts”. The social media platform is also in dispute with the CCDH, filing a civil complaint against the group  alleging that it scared off advertisers. Last week the CCDH filed a motion  to dismiss the claim.
Experts say the platform’s actions surrounding the current conflict could hasten the downfall of X – as advertisers including  IBM, Apple, Disney and Lionsgate flee or pause spending. “The damage to X’s ad business will be severe,” Enberg said. “A big-name advertiser exodus will inspire other advertisers to follow suit.”
US ad revenue on the site has dropped more than 55% year-on-year since Musk took over, but its newish managing director, Linda Yaccarino, claimed in September that X would be profitable next year and that engagement was up “dramatically”. (Dan Milmo goes into much more detail about the company’s business issues in this piece. )
                   The OpenAI soap opera                   
Last week, the board of the company behind Chat GPT AI chatbot abruptly fired its star CEO, Sam Altman. Few knew why. Then Microsoft, a major investor in the company, hired Altman  and some other illustrious people to work on its surprise new advanced AI team. Oh, and OpenAI’s staff has threatened a mass walkout if he’s not brought back  to the artificial intelligence research company.
Kevin Roose and Casey Newton, the very well-informed folks behind Hard Fork, meanwhile, rushed out a now-outdated (but still fun) “ emergency pod  ” about just how little is known about the firing – followed by their interview with the tech leader recorded days before the sacking. 
Can’t keep up? Dan Milmo has a very digestible explainer on what happened and what it means , noting that the disruption may not slow down AI development: “Elon Musk’s latest venture, xAI, has shown how quickly powerful new models can be built. It unveiled Grok, a prototype AI chatbot, after what the company claimed was just four months of development. ”
Altman, who is well liked in Silicon Valley all the way back to his Y Combinator days, is still trying to return as OpenAI’s CEO, according to the Verge. 
                   The wider TechScape                                                               The US spy tech firm Palantir has just been granted a role in handling NHS patient data. Denis Campbell has an exclusive report , pointing out “Peter Thiel, the billionaire chair and founder of Palantir, was criticised in January after he said British people’s deep affection for the NHS amounted to “Stockholm syndrome”. Will the public trust the new NHS data system  ?                                                                 Akin Olla gives a grim account  of having a dead friend contact him on Facebook – or so it seemed.                                                                 Australia has released new online safety standards which aim to tackle terror and child sexual abuse content. Josh Taylor explains more here.                                                          

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Harry Souttar heads home to give Australia narrow win over Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 5:05 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FOOTBALL; Version:2
Length: 624 words
Byline: Joey Lynch
Highlight: Leicester City defender strikes again from set piecePalestine make Socceroos work hard but lack cutting edge
Body


Australia travelled to face Palestine insisting that their focus would be on football , on securing two wins from two at the start of their long journey through World Cup qualifying ahead of a shift in focus to next January’s Asian Cup. And thanks to Harry Souttar’s first-half header in Kuwait, the lone goal in a 1-0 win, they delivered on that intention, even if their performance beyond the head of their defensive behemoth left something to be desired.
Particularly in an attacking sense, this was probably the least convincing performance from the Socceroos since their 4-1 defeat against France in the opening game of last year’s World Cup; one doubtful to have met the increased standards that coach Graham Arnold has said the players have imposed upon themselves following the elevation of their game since.
Far from sitting back and defending against their more-esteemed opponents, Palestine’s pressing and hustle to win the ball back for much of the 90 seemed to unsettle the Australians, who weren’t clean in possession and largely struggled to fashion openings.
But in Asian qualifying, especially on these long trips to the Middle East, which was difficult enough even without the disrupted build-up of Tuesday’s game, the refrain is that points can never be taken for granted. Palestine were always going to present a stiffer test than the Bangladesh side Australia dispatched 7-0 last week  – something made apparent when the Socceroos were forced to spend more time defending across the opening five minutes than they were across the entirety of that clash in Melbourne.
Tamer Seyam looked to catch Mat Ryan napping in the fifth minute of play when he tried to curl a free-kick inside the near post, and Mahmoud Abu Warda’s subsequent attempt to lob in from long-range went just over the bar.
But in fielding a player the size and quality of Souttar – who clarified to journalists last week that, yes, he is over 200cm tall, no matter what Google says – Australia have an asset that is a constant danger. When Craig Goodwin swung in a corner in the 18th minute, Mohammed Saleh didn’t do that bad a job of trying to defend Souttar, but the Leicester City defender was just too big and strong.
It took a legitimately top-draw save from Ryan in first-half stoppage time to maintain the advantage, denying Seyam from almost directly in front after a ball was swung in from the right was cushioned into his path by Ataa Jaber.
Forced to stage this nominal home game in Kuwait rather than the initially planned West Bank due to the Israel-Hamas war, it was an emotional performance from the Palestinians, especially the energetic start. Reminders of the broader context were obvious, with a crowd of expats in the stands, players wearing keffiyeh around their necks during the anthem and both teams lining up for a minute’s silence before the game as screens around the Jaber Al-Ahmad International Stadium bore the message “in solidarity with Palestine”.
Against this backdrop, it would take until the 64th minute for the Socceroos to fashion something one would regard as a quality chance from open play. Brandon Borrello, brought on as a substitute just two minutes prior, combined with Mitch Duke before sending in a shot that forced Rami Hamadeh into a scrambling save. From the resulting corner, Jordy Bos, also introduced moments prior, smashed a header off the crossbar.
While their backline was stout and they probably deserved the win in the end, the Australians could also count themselves somewhat fortunate that for all the endeavour of Palestine, they are a side that has consistently struggled to put the ball in the back of the net: now up to three games without a goal and with just one scored across six fixtures since June.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Palestine 0-1 Australia: 2026 World Cup qualifier – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 1:09 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FOOTBALL; Version:8
Length: 3761 words
Byline: Rob Smyth
Highlight: Harry Souttar scored his 10th goal in only 21 international appearances to give the Socceroos victory in a scrappy game in Kuwait
Body


block-time published-time 4.47pm GMT 
enltrIs Harry Souttar a striker in disguise? ??? With 10 Goals now for the @Socceroos , the towering Defender could easily be mistaken for one. @Michael_Zappone  talked with the @LCFC  Center Back, a short time ago. Catch the #PLEvAUS  highlights on 10 Play. ??: https://t.co/d2z8qlUYgt pic.twitter.com/guuzbKOUep
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 4.03pm GMT 
 My apologies to those of you who stayed up until the small hours to watch the game; it wasn’t one exactly one for the books. But Australia won and Harry Souttar scored again, so things could be worse. Thanks for your company – goodnight.
enltrHere's the Full-Time Match Stats for Palestine vs Australia. It's the @Socceroos  that take home the win, thanks to some Harry Souttar and Mat Ryan magic. Catch the #PLEvAUS  highlights on 10 Play! #Socceroos #Palestine @FIFAWorldCup ?? https://t.co/d2z8qlUYgt pic.twitter.com/pZhlCwdVeD
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.47pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.58pm GMT 
 The Group I table after two games  Australia 6pts (GD+8)Lebanon 2pts (GD0)Palestine 1pt (GD-1)Bangladesh 1pt (GD-7)
block-time published-time 3.57pm GMT 
 There’s plenty of goodwill at the final whistle,  with Jamie Maclaren talking to a couple of Palestine players. And then the TV coverage cuts to the highlights, so I’ve no idea what happened next.
block-time published-time 3.55pm GMT 
 Full time: Palestine 0-1 Australia  
Football, as we are told ad nauseam, is a results business. In that sense it’s been a perfectly good night for Australia, though their attacking performance, left a fair bit to be desired.
The goal machine Harry Souttar headed the winner against a Palestine team who defended admirably but lacked composure in the final third. Even so, the Socceroos needed Mat Ryan to make one of the best saves of his career on the stroke of half-time. A draw wouldn’t have flattered Palestine.
Things were generally more comfortable for Australia in the second half, with the substitute Jordy Bos coming closest when he powered a header against the bar.
enltrIt's Full-Time in Kuwait, and the @Socceroos  continue their successful @FIFAWorldCup  Qualifying run. It finishes Australia - 1, Palestine - 0. Catch the replay and highlights on 10 Play! ??: https://t.co/d2z8qlUYgt #PLEvAUS #Socceroos #FIFAWorldCup pic.twitter.com/C5r1jEarJc
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.52pm GMT 
 90+3 min: Australia substitution  Jamie Maclaren and Aiden O’Neill come for Mitch Duke and Keanu Baccus.
block-time published-time 3.52pm GMT 
 90+3 min  Saldana releases Dabbagh on the left with a stylish flick behind his standing leg. Dabbagh’s cross, alas, is too close to Ryan.
block-time published-time 3.51pm GMT 
 90+2 min  Souttar, perfectly positioned on the edge of the area, makes his umpteenth interception of the night. Even if he hadn’t scored the only goal, he would be my player of the match.
block-time published-time 3.49pm GMT 
 90+1 min  Palestine have five added minutes to find an equaliser.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.49pm GMT 
 89 min  Baccus is penalised for handball on the left wing, another chance for Palestine. It’s half cleared and then swung back into the area. There’s a big penalty appeal when Wadi is challenged by Borrello right on the edge of the area. The referee says no and replays show that both players missed the ball.
block-time published-time 3.46pm GMT 
 87 min  Al-Battat’s free-kick is headed away emphatically by either Souttar or Duke at the near post.
block-time published-time 3.46pm GMT 
 86 min: Palestine substitution  Before the free-kick is taken, Mahmoud Wadi comes on for Zaid Qunbar.
block-time published-time 3.44pm GMT 
 85 min  Miller tangles with Qunbar on the left edge of the area and is penalised, a little harshly I think. This is a chance for Palestine.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.43pm GMT 
 84 min  Metcalfe’s deep corner is headed wide by Irvine, though the whistle had gone for a free-kick. Good thing for Irvine because it was basically an open goal.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.43pm GMT 
 83 min  A good move from Australia. Borrello’s floated cross is headed down by Metcalfe to Duke, back to goal near the penalty spot. He tees up the onrushing Irvine, whose shot is deflected behind from a corner.
block-time published-time 3.40pm GMT 
 81 min: Palestine substitution  Islam Batran replaces Tamer Seyam, who was denied an equaliser by that remarkable save by Mat Ryan.
block-time published-time 3.39pm GMT 
 80 min  Another desperate long-range shot goes high over the bar, this time from Seyam. Palestine have been impressive in many facets of the game, but they lack patience in the final third.
block-time published-time 3.37pm GMT 
 78 min  After a nice run down the left by Bos, Baccus pings one from 25 yards. it hits Termanini and flies out for a throw-in.
block-time published-time 3.36pm GMT 
 77 min  Cmilio Sandana has been booked, I think for dissent.
block-time published-time 3.35pm GMT 
 76 min  This has been a tough game for Australia. Their attacking play has been unconvincing and, though Souttar and Rowles have been excellent, it still took an extraordinary save from Mat Ryan to maintain the lead.
block-time published-time 3.32pm GMT 
 73 min: Palestine substitution  Mohammad Rashid is replaced by Oday Kharoub.
block-time published-time 3.31pm GMT 
 72 min: Chance for Palestine!  A match is never safe at 1-0. Abu Warda nicks the ball and feeds it into Dabbagh near the penalty spot. He takes a touch and hits a shot on the half turn that deflects behind for a corner. I’m not sure who made the block but it was a crucial one.
block-time published-time 3.28pm GMT 
 68 min  Rowles is booked for a late, clumsy tackle on Dabbagh.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.26pm GMT 
 65 min: Bos hits the bar!  The resulting corner, taken by Goodwin, is thumped against the crossbar by the head of Jordy Bos! He arrived late and unmarked, eight yards out, and will be frustrated that he didn’t score.
That said, Hamadi may have got a slight touch to divert the ball onto the bar; if he did it was a brilliant save. (I don’t think he did but you’ve got to cover all bases eh.)
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.29pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.25pm GMT 
 64 min: Fine save by Hamadi!  That’s the best move of the match. Duke backflicks the ball to Borrello, who returns the favour with another jaunty flick. Duke slides it back towards Borrello, who shoots first-time from the edge of the area. Hamadi gets down smartly to his right to push the ball behind.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.22pm GMT 
 62 min  Miller screws a good pass into Metcalfe on the edge of the area. He can’t decide whether to shoot or pass, however, and Saleh (I think) makes a good tackle.
block-time published-time 3.21pm GMT 
 61 min: Double substitution for Australia  Jordy Bos and Brandon Borrello replace Craig Goodwin and Martin Boyle. 
block-time published-time 3.17pm GMT 
 58 min  Ataa Jaber has another wasteful shot from distance, slicing well wide with his left foot.
block-time published-time 3.16pm GMT 
 57 min  Miller’s low cross is cut out at the near post by Saleh.  As well as Palestine have defended, Graham Arnold will be disappointed with Australia’s work in the final third. 
block-time published-time 3.14pm GMT 
 54 min  There’s a brief bit of needle between Saldana and Miller. The referee invites them both to act their age and play resumes.
block-time published-time 3.13pm GMT 
 53 min  A good spell for Palestine leads to a corner on the right. It’s taken short and half cleared to Ataa Jaber, who smashes a volley into orbit from 25 yards. 
block-time published-time 3.10pm GMT 
 51 min  A poor ball from Ataa Jaber allows Australia to break, but they take too long and eventually Goodwin’s pass towards Irvine is cut out.
block-time published-time 3.09pm GMT 
 49 min  Australia are very happy to eat up the time by passing the ball around in the middle third. Palestine will have to alter their approach at some stage.
    Australia's Connor Metcalfe, middle, battles for the ball with Palestine's Mohammed Saleh. Photograph: AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.34pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.05pm GMT 
 46 min  The Socceroos begin the second half. No more substitutions on either side.
block-time published-time 3.04pm GMT 
 Mat Ryan’s save 
I’ve seen a replay now and it’s even better than it looked on first viewing.
enltrIt's Half-Time in Kuwait! The @Socceroos  lead Palestine 1-Nil, thanks to a header from Harry Souttar & some goal-saving heroics by their keeper Mat Ryan. Watch the Half-Time Show & 2nd Half, live & free on @Channel10AU  & 10 Play. ??: https://t.co/M14OJmndRV #PLEvAUS #Socceroos pic.twitter.com/9G6LwCHeN2
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 2.51pm GMT 
 Half time: Palestine 0-1 Australia  
The Socceroos lead in Kuwait, thanks mainly to the head of Harry Souttar and the hands of Mat Ryan. They haven’t played well, particularly in open play, but they’re ahead.
enltrHARRY SOUTTAR NODS IT HOME!! Goodwin to Souttar off a corner, and the partnership between these two has come to fruition again!! The @Socceroos  lead 1-Nil against Palestine! Watch #PLEvAUS  live now on @Channel10AU  and 10 Play! https://t.co/M14OJmndRV #Socceroos #Australia pic.twitter.com/Kgo1Td4heO
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 2.48pm GMT 
 45+1 min: Great save by Ryan!  What a chance for Palestine. The corner was taken short to Al-Battat, who swung a cross towards the far post. It bounced off Ataa Jaber and back across goal towards Seyam, barely three yards out. He stabbed the bouncing ball towards goal and Ryan, who charged back across his line and threw himself at Seyam’s feet, somehow clawed the ball round the post with his right hand. I’d like to see a replay but that looked like a seriously brilliant save.
enltrNot sure how it's not 1-1 right now. #PLEvAUS
 — Joey Lynch (@joeylynchy) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.47pm GMT 
 45+1 min  There will be two minutes of added time. Al-Battat charges down the cross and whips a cross that is shinned behind for a corner by Behich.
block-time published-time 2.46pm GMT 
 45 min  Palestine have got two players marking Souttar now. But this time Goodwin’s corner evades him and is booted away at the near post.
block-time published-time 2.44pm GMT 
 43 min  Metcalfe’s cross hits Saleh and goes behind for a corner. Harold Souttar Esq. is jogging forward.
block-time published-time 2.43pm GMT 
 42 min  Palestine are definitely picking their moments to press. At some stage they will have to be more aggressive without the ball; for now it’s more important to stay within range of the Socceroos going into the last 20 minutes.
block-time published-time 2.41pm GMT 
 40 min  Rashid lifts a promising pass to release Seyam on the right wing. He can’t quite catch up with the ball, though, and his cross goes behind for a goalkick.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.39pm GMT 
 37 min  Baccus turns his man on the halfway line, in the inside-right channel, and lofts a lovely pass over the top towards Boyle. He heads the ball in to the area and tries to cut it back towards Duke, but Saleh makes a good block and the keeper Hamadi beats Boyle to the loose ball.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.37pm GMT 
 36 min  Miller breaks into the area from the right but is penalised for pulling back the defender.
block-time published-time 2.35pm GMT 
 33 min  An excellent cross from Al-Battat is headed away decisively by Souttar. Moments later Qunbar tries to lob the ball over Souttar in the box; it hits him in the face and rebounds to safety.
block-time published-time 2.34pm GMT 
 33 min  Palestine look a decent, organised side but they have struggled to score goals of late, with only one in the last seven hours. Apart from that earlier save, Mat Ryan hasn’t had much to do.
block-time published-time 2.32pm GMT 
 30 min  That’s better from the Socceroos. Goodwin’s Harvard-educated left foot swings the ball beyond the far post, which Metcalfe meets with a cushioned volley on the run. The angle is tight and Hamadi saves comfortably.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.29pm GMT 
 28 min  I don’t know whether it’s the pitch, the selective intensity of the Palestine pressing or both, but Australia’s passing has been unusually sloppy in the first half hour.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.31pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.26pm GMT 
 25 min  The goal has settled Australia down slightly, though it’s still a very scrappy game.
block-time published-time 2.24pm GMT 
 23 min: Socceroos substitution  Lewis Miller replaces the unfortunate Ryan Strain at right-back. 
block-time published-time 2.22pm GMT 
 21 min  Ryan Strain is down and looks in serious pain. There was nobody near him when he went down – it looks like he twisted his groin after getting his foot stuck in the turf. Play continues while he is treated off the field.
block-time published-time 2.21pm GMT 
 20 min  That goal came against the run of play, in truth, but that’s the value of set-piece goals. They occur almost in a vacuum.
enltrHarry Souttar is a cheat code in the box at set pieces. Warra header. #PLEvAUS
 — Joey Lynch (@joeylynchy) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.20pm GMT 
 GOAL! Palestine 0-1 Australia (Souttar 18)  
Harry Souttar’s spectacular goalscoring run continues. Goodwin curled a superb inswinging corner to the near post, where Souttar was too strong for Saleh and headed in from five yards. That’s his 10th goal in only 21 appearances for the Socceroos.
    Australia's Harry Souttar scores. Photograph: Yasser Al-Zayyat/AFP/Getty Images      Australian players celebrate after the goal. Photograph: Yasser Al-Zayyat/AFP/Getty Images     
enltrHARRY SOUTTAR NODS IT HOME!! Goodwin to Souttar off a corner, and the partnership between these two has come to fruition again!! The @Socceroos  lead 1-Nil against Palestine! Watch #PLEvAUS  live now on @Channel10AU  and 10 Play! https://t.co/M14OJmndRV #Socceroos #Australia pic.twitter.com/Kgo1Td4heO
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.17pm GMT 
 17 min  Palestine continue to look very comfortable. The Socceroos haven’t been able to find any attacking rhythm. Yet.
block-time published-time 2.16pm GMT 
 14 min  There were reports of planned protests in the seventh and 13th minutes.  It’s quite hard to see on TV whether the Palestinian fans have turned their backs on the game; nothing has been said on the TV commentary.
block-time published-time 2.14pm GMT 
enltrAustralia's had to do more defending across the first five minutes than they pretty much had to do across the entire 90 last week. #PLEvAUS
 — Joey Lynch (@joeylynchy) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 2.13pm GMT 
 12 min  Palestine have an excellent record in World Cup qualifiers at home (or on neutral territory), with 17 wins and no defeats in the last 21 games.
block-time published-time 2.12pm GMT 
 11 min  Metcalfe has a go from 25 yards. It’s pretty well struck but too close to Hamadi.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.11pm GMT 
 10 min  Palestine have started confidently, pressing high when they can and attacking with ambition. Australia haven’t really settled.
block-time published-time 2.08pm GMT 
 7 min  The corner is half cleared to Abu Warda, who hooks a shot onto the roof of the net from 22 yards. Ryan had it covered but it was a decent effort.
block-time published-time 2.07pm GMT 
 6 min: Good save by Ryan!  The angle is tight but Seyam goes for goal with a nice left-footed curler. Ryan moves smartly to his left and dives to punch the ball behind for a corner.
block-time published-time 2.06pm GMT 
 5 min  Ataa Jaber is fouled clumsily by Duke, just outside the area on the right. Seyam is over the ball…
block-time published-time 2.03pm GMT 
 2 min  The match is underway, though I missed the first 90 seconds due to technical problems. Australia, in their away kit, are on the attack as I type.
enltrHere's the National Anthems! Watch the @FIFAWorldCup  Qualifier between Palestine and Australia, live and free on @Channel10AU  and 10 Play now. ??: https://t.co/M14OJmndRV #Socceroos #PLEvAUS @Socceroos pic.twitter.com/DbpUVqtFIk
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.59pm GMT 
 Graham Arnold speaks 
enltrWhat are the @Socceroos  expecting from Palestine tonight? ??? @Michael_Zappone  caught up with their coach Graham Arnold, a short time ago. Watch #PLEvAUS  live and free now on @Channel10AU  and 10 play! ??: https://t.co/M14OJmndRV  (live streams) #Socceroos #Palestine #Australia pic.twitter.com/gFpXC5dWHf
 — 10 Football (@10FootballAU) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 1.45pm GMT 
 Full time: Bangladesh 1-1 Lebanon 
The other game in Group I has finished level in Dhaka. That means a win tonight would put the Socceroos four points clear after two games. Here’s how the table looks:
Australia P1 Pts 3Lebanon P2 Pts 2Palestine P1 Pts 1Bangladesh P2 Pts 1    Palestine goalkeeper Rami Hamada leads his team on to the pitch. Photograph: Noufal Ibrahim/EPA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.28pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.33pm GMT 
 Related:  Socceroos will stay focused, vows Souttar, as Palestine await in qualifier
block-time published-time 1.27pm GMT 
 Protests ‘planned after 7, 13 and 75 minutes’ 
This is from our liveblog  on the Israel-Hamas war
The Palestine football team were due to be playing their first home game since 2019 in Ramallah in the occupied West Bank. Because of the war, it has been moved to Kuwait. They face Australia  in a qualifying match for the 2026 World Cup.
Fans attending the match are expected to stage protests against Israel’s actions in the Gaza Strip. Earlier Al Jazeera reported that “at seven minutes into the match, fans will raise Palestinian flags and wave keffiyehs to mark the start of the war on 7 October [the date of the Hamas attack inside Israel]. Thirteen minutes into the match, fans will stand and turn their backs on the pitch to protest the killing of more than 13,000 people since the start of the attacks. On 75 minutes, fans will raise their arms and join hands in protest against 75 years of occupation.”
It also reported that at another signal, fans will be raising keys during the match, to “symbolise those taken by the Palestinians when they locked their doors and fled during the Nakba”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.23pm GMT 
 The Socceroos’ players will denote a five-figure sum,  taken from their match fees for this game, to Oxfam. 
Football Australia will also match the donation.
 Related:  Socceroos to donate to humanitarian efforts in Gaza ahead of World Cup qualifier against Palestine
block-time published-time 1.17pm GMT 
 Some of the Palestine players remain in Gaza.  Those who travelled to Kuwait via a training camp in Jordan are preoccupied with the safety of their loved one. The Palestine coach Makram Daboub has been discussing the extraordinary circumstances in which this match will take place.
 Related:  Palestine coach Makram Daboub: ‘The players are doing their best but it is not easy’
block-time published-time 1.09pm GMT 
 Team news: four changes for Socceroos  
Palestine make two changes from their draw with Lebanon. Mohammed Rashid and Zaid Qunbar replace Mohammed Yaheen and Chihadeh Saleh.
The Socceroos bring in Ryan Strain, Kye Rowles, Aziz Behich and Martin Boyle  for Lewis Miller, Cameron Burgess, Jordan Bos and Brandon Borrello. They’re all among the substitutes.
 Palestine (possible 4-3-3) Hamadi; Al-Battat, Termanini, M Saleh, Saldaña; Rashid, Jaber, Abu Warda; Seyam, Qunbar, Dabbagh. Substitutes: Kaddura, Naim Abuaker, Khalil, Hamed, Mahdi Issa, Farawi, Kharoub, Yamin, Batran, C Saleh, Hassan, Mahmoud Wadi.
 Australia (possible 4-1-2-3) Ryan; Strain, Souttar, Rowles, Behich; Baccus; Irvine, Metcalfe; Boyle, Duke, Goodwin. Substitutes: Burgess, Bos, Silvera, Maclaren, Yengi, Borrello, Gauci, Circati, O’Neill, Maynard-Brewer, Miller, Luongo.
enltr?? Graham Arnold makes four changes from our last match against Bangladesh. Ryan Strain, Kye Rowles, Aziz Behich and Martin Boyle all return to the Starting XI. ???? v ???? - 22.11.23 - 1:00am AEDT ?????? Live on Channel 10, Paramount+, 10 Play #PLEvAUS #Socceroos pic.twitter.com/IbxOlWEz8P
 — Subway Socceroos (@Socceroos) November 21, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.45pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.09pm GMT 
 Preamble  
Hello and welcome to live, minute-by-minute coverage of the World Cup qualifier between Palestine and Australia. The Socceroos have played almost 600 ‘A’ internationals, but they’ve never had a game quite like this.
The war in Gaza puts this game in a unique context. The match was originally scheduled to be played in Ramallah in the West Bank – it would have been Palestine’s first home game since 2019 – before being moved for security reasons. Palestine’s first scheduled home game since the outbreak of war will instead be played at the Jaber Al-Ahmad International Stadium. 
It’s their second World Cup qualifier, following a goalless draw with Lebanon on Thursday. The Socceroos started their campaign by beating Bangladesh 7-0 in Melbourne, with the substitute Jamie Maclaren scoring a second-half hat-trick. Palestine, the highest ranked opponent in this group, will be a tougher challenge, though it will still be a major surprise if Australia don’t win.
“What we do have control over is our performance and playing against Palestine and going out and getting the job done for Australia,” said the Socceroos coach Graham Arnold, who described the war as “horrific” after Thursday’s game. “We’re very sympathetic for everyone with what’s going on, but again, it’s a game of football and that brings a lot of joy to everybody.”
 Kick off  5pm local time, 1am AEDT, 2pm GMT.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.16pm GMT

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




News live: Penny Wong confirms 67 Australians fled Gaza overnight; bushfire emergency warning in southern Perth
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 7:31 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:25
Length: 17486 words
Byline: Daisy Dumas (now) and Emily Wind (earlier)
Highlight: Follow today’s news liveLabor’s ‘draconian’ immigration detention conditions challenged in high courtGet our morning and afternoon news emails, free app or daily news podcast
Body


block-time published-time 7.52am GMT 
 What we learned; Wednesday 22 Noivember  
It’s time to wrap up a big day of news. Here’s what’s been keeping us busy:
Foreign minister Penny Wongcommended news of a truce in Gaza  and said that 67 Australians , including permanent residents and families, were able to flee Gaza overnight through the Rafah border crossing into Egypt.Former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann is seeking justice, vindication and compensation after a broadcast by Network Ten, The Project and Lisa Wilkinson “utterly destroyed him”, the federal court has heard. Sports administrator and consultant Anter Isaac was elected chair of the board of Football Australia  at the organisation’s annual general meeting.A bushfire threatened lives  and homes in Aubin Grove and Hammond Park in Perth’s south and forced the closure of Kwinana Freeway.Nick Avery, chief executive of South West Autism Network, said the autistic community and their supporters were “extremely concerned”  about the reports that the government intends to wind back funding for autism in the NDIS.More than 20 people were arrested and charged following an unauthorised pro-Palestine protest at Port Botany  overnight.New South Wales set up a scheme to support the development of big batteries  with 380 megawatts, as part of its roadmap to renewables.Victoria Police are contacting about 140 witnesses as part of an investigation into the Daylesford pub crash  that killed five people earlier this month, the state’s coroners court has heard.
Thanks for joining us – see you tomorrow.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.00am GMT
block-time published-time 7.47am GMT 
A Senate committee has recommended legislative changes targeting tobacco and vaping products be “passed without delay,” while criticising retail industry lobby groups for lacking transparency.
The proposed amendments to the public health (tobacco and other products) bill include new measures to discourage smoking, and to prevent the promotion of vaping and e-cigarettes.
If passed it would see plain packaging and health warnings on vape products, and updated and improved graphic warnings added to tobacco products, including on individual cigarettes. The use of specified additives in tobacco and vaping products, like menthols, would also be banned.
In September, the Senate referred the bill to the community affairs legislation committee for inquiry, with public hearings held earlier in November.
At those hearings, representatives from lobby groups including the Australasian Association of Convenience Stores and the Master Grocers Australia told the committee that vaping reforms would fuel the illicit tobacco and vaping markets.  The groups refused to disclose the details of funding they receive from the tobacco and vaping industries. 
In submissions made to the inquiry, tobacco companies Philip Morris Australia and Imperial Brands Australasia also argued the bill risked accelerating the proliferation of the illicit tobacco trade.
But the committee’s report, published on Wednesday evening, made only one recommendation – that the bill be passed by the Senate “without delay”.
On illicit tobacco, the report noted comments from health experts including from the co-chief executive officer of the Australian Council of Smoking and Health, Laura Hunter, who said: “the best way to stamp out the illicit market, is to help people to quit smoking and that this ‘piece of legislation is a huge step towards that”.
The report also noted: “that two witnesses who gave evidence to the inquiry, the Australian Association of Convenience Stores and Master Grocers Australia, failed to answer questions put by committee members regarding their potential conflicts of interests despite being told that this would be requested immediately prior to their appearance”.
“The committee considers the refusal by both witnesses to answer these questions… deeply concerning.”
block-time published-time 7.29am GMT 
A little light relief after what has been a big news day …
Architect Nic Brunsdon has explained the concept behind his giant inflatable sphere, which is the latest instalment in the National Gallery of Victoria’s annual architecture commission series, reports AAP.
At more than 14m high, (This is) Air responds to the breeze by swaying slowly and a little disconcertingly.
“It was designed for the wind - this is about as much as it’s ever moved,” he told AAP.
The sphere is made from an inner and outer synthetic fabric shell supported by a weighted steel base, that “breathes” by inflating and deflating over a five-minute remotely controlled cycle.
The installation, which opens tonight, is a meditation on the universal qualities of air, he said, that’s intended to make the invisible, visible.
“It’s a fundamental defining feature of life on earth, from the first breath to the last.”
The sphere’s outer shell measures 14.5m across and when fully inflated, its volume approximates how much air a person breathes in a year.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.47am GMT
block-time published-time 7.24am GMT 
Over to mining pioneer Lang Hancock, who was at “breaking point” as he fought to stop daughter Gina Rinehart from “destroying” his life’s work before his death, a multi-billion dollar legal stoush over iron ore riches has been told.
A lawyer for Mrs Rinehart’s children says the reclusive billionaire’s relationship with her famous father was “not good” in the late ‘80s and she was “crucially worried” about maintaining her claim over his fortune, reports AAP. 
“One of the things she’s worried about is (that her mother) Hope Margaret’s shares... would go to Rose (Porteous),” Adam Hochroth said as he summarised his clients’ case in Perth’s Supreme Court on Wednesday.
As the pair worked to resolve a family feud, Lang Hancock signed a document handwritten by his daughter that placed an equal number of company shares for her and her children in a trust.
“A week after this letter is signed, Lang wrote to Gina... and notifies her that he considers that document to have been signed by him under duress and is not legal,” Mr Hochroth said.
Lang Hancock also told his daughter the document that she intended to be legally binding was not enforceable because she had taken her mother’s will to the US and that was holding up probate.
“So I don’t actually have any shares to place in trust for you,” the court was told he said at the time.
block-time published-time 7.02am GMT 
 Permanent ceasefire needed, Palestinian advocates say 
The Australia Palestine Advocacy Network (APAN) has reacted to the news of a four-day ceasefire and hostage deal in Gaza.
APAN president Nasser Mashni said while the truce would allow the passage of humanitarian convoys into the warzone, what was needed was a permanent ceasefire.
These four days might give Gazans a chance to access food, water and medicine, a moment to bury their loved ones or perhaps locate those who are still missing, but the Israeli prime minister himself has said he will press on with the violence, which should horrify our communities.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.47am GMT
block-time published-time 6.42am GMT 
 ClubsNSW investigates holding charges placed on non-customer cards 
ClubsNSW has launched an investigation after people who have never had dealings with the association had holding charges placed on their credit cards.
People who had never used ClubsNSW’s services began noticing small charges on their cards, ranging from $0.01 to $1, in the past week.
ClubsNSW, which represents over 1,200 clubs and pubs across New South Wales , identified the charges as holding charges and blamed a “third-party payment gateway system provider”.
“We have taken immediate steps in response, including launching a thorough investigation into the issue, which is progressing,” a spokesperson for ClubsNSW said.
Read more:
 Related:  ClubsNSW investigates after holding charges placed on non-customer credit cards
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.46am GMT
block-time published-time 6.32am GMT 
 Perth bushfire warning downgraded 
The emergency bushfire warning in Perth’s south has been downgraded to a watch and act  alert and the Kwinana Freeway has reopened.
Western Australia’s department of fire and emergency services said there is a possible threat to lives and homes as a fire is burning in the area and the conditions are changing.
The alert covers Botany Park, Kwinana Freeway, Rowley Road, Frankland Park and Canary Drive in parts of parts of Aubin Grove, Hammond Park and Wattleup.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.39am GMT
block-time published-time 6.19am GMT 
 Blacktown council’s novel initiative to curb family violence 
Rubbish trucks in Blacktown in Sydney’s west are joining efforts to curb high rates of domestic violence.
Social services minister Amanda Rishworth said the slow-moving trucks would be emblazoned with “Violence is never OK” messages as part of a new Blacktown city council initiative.
The move comes after the council saw a need in the community, she said, which has particularly high rates of family and domestic violence.
Speaking about the government’s five-year plan to reduce the number of deaths of women at the hands of intimate partners, she told ABC’s Afternoon Briefing:
One life lost to domestic and family violence is one life too many … There’s a generational change that we need to make. It involves prevention, it involves early intervention, it involves response and it involves healing and recovery.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.24am GMT
block-time published-time 6.00am GMT 
Staying on the topic of the new hostage deal and temporary ceasefire in Gaza, Liberal MP Zoe McKenzie said the development was “not a solution but it is a welcome reprieve”.
Also speaking with ABC’s Background Briefing was Labor MP Luke Gosling. He said the pause was something “we’ve been calling for a long time to allow humanitarian aid and to allow people to get out”.
It’s been absolutely horrendous. But it’s also been a situation where we need to not bow to the demands of terrorism.
And we need to move towards that peaceful resolution and this has been obviously a welcome step today.
Listen to in-depth reporting on the truce in today’s Full Story podcast:
 Related:  A truce agreement in Gaza - podcast
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.27am GMT
block-time published-time 5.46am GMT 
Retired army general  Mick Ryan has told ABC’s Afternoon Briefing that the four-day ceasefire in Gaza  may “bleed away” the momentum that the Israeli Defence Force has generated over the last few weeks in northern Gaza.
“They have been fighting quickly and moving quickly in this operation,” he said. When the pause ends, the IDF “will want to come out of the blocks quickly and shock Hamas and regenerate momentum”.
When asked what IDF troops may typically do during a ceasefire, Ryan said:
One thing I can assure you they will not do is sit idle. They will take the opportunity to sleep, have a shower, rethink, there will be maintenance on the vehicles. They will be planning for what comes next, conducting reconnaissance, intelligence, war-gaming and training so they can leap out of the box as soon as the pause is over and regenerate momentum and regain initiative in the operation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.54am GMT
block-time published-time 5.34am GMT 
 Hostage deal an ‘important step’ but not enough, Palestinian ambassador says 
 Dr Izzat Abdulhadi, ambassador for the General Delegation of Palestine to Australia, has told ABC’s Afternoon Briefing that the newly forged hostage release deal  was an “important step” that will allow people in Gaza to “breathe a little bit.”
But this is not sufficient, actually. Because what we need is a permanent truce, a permanent ceasefire, in which the humanitarian assistance will be delivered effectively to all people in Gaza.
It’s a good deal. I’m happy for the hostages, the Israelis, also very happy that our own children and women in Israeli jails will be also released. This is an important step.
But, he said, Palestine’s objective is still to reach a permanent ceasefire in the near future.
    Dr Izzat Abdulhadi, ambassador for the General Delegation of Palestine to Australia: ‘What we need is a permanent truce, a permanent ceasefire.’ Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.38am GMT
block-time published-time 5.30am GMT 
Another update about foreign minister Penny Wong’s press conference this afternoon: 
The ABC has reported the federal government has approved 860 visas for Palestinians with connections to Australia since the 7 October terrorist attack by Hamas. Wong was asked about this in her press conference - she didn’t deny the reporting, but added that over the same period, 1793 visas were issued to Israeli citizens.
“Obviously there’s a lot of demand from those in the region for Australian visas for people who are eligible,” Wong said.
She was asked on several occasions in the press conference about the visas, adding each time that people obtaining visas are “subject to appropriate security checks” from Border Force and other authorities.
block-time published-time 5.17am GMT 
 Penny Wong confirms 67 Australians fled Gaza overnight  
 Penny Wong went on to say that 67 Australians, including permanent residents and families, were able to flee Gaza overnight through the Rafah border crossing into Egypt. The government has seen 127 Australians now leave Gaza.
Wong said it was a “very difficult situation” and the government hoped all Australians would be able to leave Gaza, with negotiations ongoing with the US and Egypt on this matter – as she thanked those nations.
The minister said that Australia “would want to see a sustainable ceasefire and we also know that cannot be one-sided”.
“We recognise that the steps that have been taken today, with this agreement that has been negotiated, is progress towards these goals,” Wong said.
We remain deeply concerned about the loss of civilian life, and I know so many Australians are deeply concerned about the loss of civilian life. People are distressed about the horrific attack by Hamas. People want hostages released and people are distressed by the loss of civilian life in the period we have seen over these last few weeks.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.27am GMT
block-time published-time 5.08am GMT 
 Australia 'commends' Middle East breakthrough  
Foreign minister Penny Wong says Australia “commends” reports of a breakthrough deal in the Middle East conflict , calling for more progress toward a “long-term and enduring peace”.
Wong, fresh back from a trip to India, spoke to media in Adelaide after reports of an agreement on hostage exchanges between Israel and Hamas. The minister said Australia has consistently called for the release of hostages taken by Hamas in the 7 October attack, as well as access for humanitarian services into Gaza and the protection of civilian lives - plus “the next steps towards a sustainable ceasefire”.
“What we see today is progress towards each of these goals and we commend it. Details are still emerging but if the deal holds it will see progress,” Wong said.
This is, of course, an important and necessary step in what we must ultimately work towards is a long-term and enduring peace and again I reiterate that a long and enduring peace requires a two state solution with Israelis and Palestinians living securely.
Wong said Australia would continue working with partners “to help protect and support civilians, to help prevent conflict from spreading and to reinforce the need for the just and enduring peace”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.24am GMT
block-time published-time 4.59am GMT 
 Number of threatened species in Australia’s north increases 
The number of listed threatened species in Australia’s world heritage northern rainforests has increased by 25% since 2020, as ecologists say they are now clearly observing the long-predicted impacts of global heating.
The management and conservation authority for the Unesco-listed Queensland wet tropics  this week handed its latest environmental report  to the state government, containing “sombre but pragmatic” warnings about the declining health of some species, including the ringtail possum, that were believed robust when the area was given international protection in 1988.
“The insidious and damaging threat posed by invasive species and diseases, and the impacts of climate change, present real danger to the continuing integrity of the area’s biodiversity,” the report says.
Continue reading:
 Related:  Queensland’s wet tropics see 25% rise in threatened species in three years as climate change bites
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.04am GMT
block-time published-time 4.47am GMT 
 Court hears of Lehrmann's isolation after The Project broadcast  
 Bruce Lehrmann was booted out of a Facebook Messenger group chat with three close friends after The Project broadcast and was “unfriended” by friends on social media, the former Liberal staffer has told the court.
“I became severely isolated,” Lehrmann said, detailing that he was blocked, unfriended and cut off by many friends and contacts that led to him shutting down his social media accounts and being admitted to a private hospital suffering emotional distress.
“I was booted out of that group chat in the week after The Project airing,” Lehrmann said when he took the stand on the first day of the trial.
“I have worked out who my real friends were.”
Lehrmann was shown copies of articles which appeared on independent blogs which named him as the alleged assailant referred to by The Project.
    Bruce Lehrmann arrives at the federal court of Australia in Sydney today. Photograph: Bianca de Marchi/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.02am GMT
block-time published-time 4.36am GMT 
 Bushfire warning issued for Perth suburbs  
Emergency services in Western Australia have issued a bushfire emergency warning  for Aubin Grove and Hammond Park in southern Perth.
The Kwinana Freeway is closed in both directions between Russell Road and Rowley Road, said the state’s department of fire and emergency services.
The ABC reports that heavy traffic is banking up along a 12km stretch of the road.
The region is in the grip of a severe heatwave, with temperatures in Perth expected to reach 39C today.
There is a threat to lives and homes, states the alert. People bound by Hammond Road, Mokare Reserve, Kwinana Freeway, Botany Park and Rowley Road are in danger and need to act immediately to survive.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.04am GMT
block-time published-time 4.24am GMT 
 Concern in disability sector over reports of funding decrease for autism under NDIS 
Another advocate for autistic people has spoken to Guardian Australia about reports that the government intends to wind back funding for autism in the NDIS.
 Nick Avery, chief executive of South West Autism Network, today said the autistic community and their supporters were “extremely concerned” about the reports:
Autistic participants already receive NDIS plans with significantly lower funding than for all other disability types. For kids aged 7-14 years, we are seeing NDIS plans with funding as low as $3,500 per year. For context, one hour of therapy per fortnight costs more than $5,000 per year.
Autism is an “invisible disability”, Avery said, which leads to a misperception in the community that most autistic people don’t require support, and ongoing stigma about autism more generally.
Avery’s comments come as another disability advocate, Skye Kakoschke-Moore, chief executive of Children and Young People with Disability Australia, told us that recent reports suggesting families are pursuing autism diagnoses because they see the NDIS as a financial opportunity were “unhelpful” and “misleading”.
Avery agreed, noting that “NDIS funding is not income”:
Participants and families do not benefit financially from becoming an NDIS participant. NDIS funding can only be used to pay for therapy, workers, assistive technology and home modifications - costs incurred as a direct result of the participant’s disability. For every $1.00 invested in the NDIS, $2.25 is delivered back into the Australian economy
People only apply for NDIS support because they desperately need the support. The NDIS is not welfare, and unfortunately there have been politicians and some media who have misrepresented NDIS participants as receiving welfare. It would be wonderful to see the media consult the disability community more, and work with us to change these negative stereotypes.
 Related:  Disability advocate hits back at ‘misleading’ claims that NDIS funding is incentivising autism diagnoses
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.27am GMT
block-time published-time 4.18am GMT 
The Bureau of Meteorology has issued a severe thunderstorm warning for parts of New South Wales.
The bureau warns that flash flooding may occur in the central west of the state, with Orange, Parkes, Dubbo and Coonabarabran likely to be impacted by localised heavy rainfall. 
enltr??? Severe Thunderstorm Warning for slow-moving storms on and west of the ranges. Storms are likely to produce localised Heavy Rainfall that may lead to flash flooding over the next several hours. https://t.co/jJWt2wlxel pic.twitter.com/UVxxOLlZv9
 — Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 4.11am GMT 
Thanks, Emily.
Let’s return briefly to communication minster Michelle Rowland’s speech at the National Press Club earlier. If you were following the blog live, she got a number of questions about gambling, and the government’s plans to restrict advertising. There wasn’t a lot of news in there, with Labor still planning next steps, but she did hint at a couple of markers on where that might go.
In response to Guardian Australia’s question about gambling ads that could be seen by kids on social media, Rowland did tease with the possibility of using federal regulations to require social platforms to not show such content to minors.
“You highlight the important point that when we talk about vulnerable Australians when it comes to gambling advertising, that we also consider that children are some of those vulnerable Australians as well,” Rowland said.
“No decisions have been made yet. But I would like to share with you that throughout this consultation process, one thing that we have been very focused on in understanding from advocacy and other experts is how harmful this is for children, where it appears and what steps can be taken in response.”
    Michelle Rowland at the National Press Club today. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP   
Rowland went on to mention “what the platforms could be doing about minimising that access to those harms as well”, noting that social media companies “know more about their consumers than governments and regulators ever will.”
“So we are continually looking at ways in which we can utilise the Basic Online Safety Expectations to keep vulnerable Australians safe, particularly children.”
Now, the BOSE is interesting to mention here, because the big announcement from Rowland’s main speech was that the government would amend those expectations to ask social media companies to do better on harm reduction around AI-generated content. The fact the minister raised BOSE when asked about social media ads for gambling might hint that this could be an area the government is looking at – for instance, changing that framework to say the government expects social media companies not to show gambling ads to kids.
The minister’s speech also touched on changes to “recommender” functions on social media, the algorithms that serve up content to users, as well as age verification frameworks for accessing content like pornography.
Rowland said the governments wants industry to “lift its game” in that regard, and “invest more in what we know can be effective age assurance technologies”.
So adding up all those pieces, could hint at where things go next as the government addresses public concerns about gambling ads. Watch this space.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.21am GMT
block-time published-time 4.03am GMT 
Many thanks for joining me on the blog today. I’ll leave you with the lovely Daisy Dumas, who will take you through the rest of our rolling coverage. Take care!
block-time published-time 4.02am GMT 
 Lehrmann takes the stand in defamation trial  
Former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann has taken the stand in his federal court defamation trial against the Ten Network and presenter Lisa Wilkinson.
Before lunch the court was told the interview Wilkinson conducted with his former Liberal colleague Brittany Higgins had destroyed his life and he was seeking vindication and compensation.
It will be the first time Lehrmann has spoken in open court as he was not required to give evidence during the criminal trial, which was aborted last year.
Lehrmann sat in the front seat of the court on the opposite side of the room from Wilkinson for day one of the morning’s proceedings.
He is suing both Wilkinson and Ten for the interview which aired on The Project.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.06am GMT
block-time published-time 4.00am GMT 
 Proportion of Australians expected to go into debt over Christmas rises 
One in three Australian adults is forecast to go into debt this Christmas, according to research for The Salvation Army.
More than 12.8 million adults – or 62% – are ending their year worried about their finances, compared to about 50% last year.
The research also found 31% of adults are seeking to use a credit card to pay for Christmas expenses, up from 18% last year.
The number of Australians planning on spending money they don’t already have through buy-now, pay-later services has also doubled to 15%.
The charity is expecting a surge in the number of people seeking support this year and said for those who reach out, almost half are expected to be doing so for the first time.
- from AAP
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.05am GMT
block-time published-time 3.47am GMT 
 Greens back students striking in support of Gaza  
Students striking for peace in Gaza deserve support, say the Greens, as school children prepare to walk away from their desks in solidarity with Palestinians tomorrow and Friday.
Victorian Greens education spokesperson, Aiv Puglielli, said:
Every day young people are watching this humanitarian catastrophe unfold on their phones.
The Greens back every student planning to strike tomorrow and use their voices to call for an immediate ceasefire.
Senator Penny Allman-Payne said that “Australian school students are seeing kids their own age pulled from the rubble of Gaza”.
Is it any wonder that they want the government to do something about this horror?
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.52am GMT
block-time published-time 3.33am GMT 
 Worker injured in gas rupture in Sydney 
A worker in Sydney’s northern beaches has been injured after a ruptured gas line burst into flames.
Fire and Rescue NSW said it prevented a “potential catastrophic explosion” after a gas main ruptured and caught fire in Manly today.
A worker sustained minor burns when the fire broke out around 10.45am this morning. They were checked by paramedics and taken to hospital for further treatment to their face and hands.
A dozen firefighters worked for two and a half hours to cool adjoining utilities services, a FRNSW statement said.
They didn’t attempt to extinguish the fire as this would have allowed uncontrolled gas to escape and possibly trigger an explosive re-ignition.
Gas supplies have since been shut-off and the residual gas has burnt out. Gas company technicians will now further assess and repair the damaged line.
enltrMANLY | Worker injured after ruptured gas line bursts into flames - VIDEO. Fire and Rescue NSW (FRNSW) has prevented a potential catastrophic explosion after a gas main ruptured and caught ablaze at Manly, in Sydney's Northern Beaches, today. A... https://t.co/eccYK1ocwE
 — Fire and Rescue NSW (@FRNSW) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.42am GMT
block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
Prime minister Anthony Albanese has shared some photos to social media from the opening of the Melbourne Holocaust Museum this morning:
enltrI was honoured to open the Melbourne Holocaust Museum today and meet remarkable survivors with @JacintaAllanMP  and @joshburnsmp.  We must never forget the depths of the Holocaust’s cruelty. pic.twitter.com/EVF2ZSCLGM
 — Anthony Albanese (@AlboMP) November 22, 2023
enltrWithin the walls of this museum, quiet dignity co-exists with awful truths, each one of them giving meaning to the words we keep repeating: never again. Australia will always denounce antisemitism, just as we denounce all forms of racism. pic.twitter.com/DjmAMhzM5x
 — Anthony Albanese (@AlboMP) November 22, 2023
Albanese wrote on X/Twitter:
We must never forget the depths of the Holocaust’s cruelty.
Within the walls of this museum, quiet dignity co-exists with awful truths, each one of them giving meaning to the words we keep repeating: never again. Australia will always denounce antisemitism, just as we denounce all forms of racism.
Albanese gave a speech at the museum earlier this morning, and you can read all the details on that here. 
block-time published-time 3.17am GMT 
 Reasoning behind McBride decision to remain hidden for now  
The reasons behind why an ACT supreme court judge upheld a commonwealth intervention to withhold key documents from the trial of David McBride will remain hidden for at least a few more weeks.
McBride pleaded guilty to three offences on Friday , including stealing commonwealth information and passing that on to journalists at the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, after the federal government’s public interest immunity claim over some evidence was upheld.
 Justice David Mossop handed over his reasons on Wednesday but they will not be made public until the commonwealth applies the appropriate redactions to any sections it believes should remain secret.
That process, Justice Mossop requested, should be completed “as soon as practicable”.
McBride’s team will then be given 14 days to dispute any redactions or to decide whether any additional ones should be applied to the reasons before it can be made public.
 Andrew Berger KC, the Australian government solicitor acting for the commonwealth, last week said some material in the case should be kept entirely secret on national security grounds. Berger said last Wednesday:
The public interest at play here is a very important one, the national security and defence of this country... indeed, we say it is harder to think of a stronger public interest than the security and defence of Australia?
A potential sentencing date for McBride could be determined as early as Thursday morning.
    Whistleblower David McBride pleaded guilty to three offences on Friday, including stealing commonwealth information and passing it on to journalists at the ABC. Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.38am GMT
block-time published-time 3.11am GMT 
 Manhunt under way after woman found shot dead in Adelaide  
A state-wide manhunt is under way for a man accused of murdering his wife in their Adelaide home, reports AAP.
Police allege  Kevin Jewell, 55, shot his wife Jodie dead in their Modbury North property shortly after 6pm on Tuesday.
Supt Doc Bray said Ms Jewell had previously told a friend she had been the victim of domestic violence.
The friend became concerned when she couldn’t contact Ms Jewell and contacted police who went to the property and found Ms Jewell dead with a gunshot wound.
Kevin Jewell lived on the upper level of the house, while Ms Jewell and her teenage daughter lived downstairs.
“They had been somewhat estranged for a period of time,” Supt Bray told reporters on Wednesday.
Police have obtained an arrest warrant for Jewell in the Adelaide magistrates court on Wednesday for the charge of murder.
“If Kevin is watching, I make this appeal to him,” Supt Bray said.
We are actively looking for you and we will locate you. I encourage you forthwith, straight away, without any delay to engage with a solicitor and negotiate your safe surrender to police.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.30am GMT
block-time published-time 3.06am GMT 
 Ella Cutler, the Western Australian police officer who suffered horrific injuries after falling while on holiday in Croatia, has met with WA commissioner Col Blanch as she continues her long recovery.
The 25-year-old said she “feels good in general” and is keen to return to work, reports the West Australian.  In August, Cutler fell 10m at Pile Gate in Dubrovnik, fracturing her spine, skull, limbs and ribs and leaving her fighting for her life.
There are times when my body might hurt a little bit more than what it normally would, but generally, I am OK.
enltrElla Cutler and her family met with Commissioner Col Blanch yesterday and expressed their appreciation for the support shown by WA Police and the community of Western Australia. Ella is very humbled by the outpouring of love and support she has received ?? pic.twitter.com/5dv7hmolSH
 — WA Police Force (@WA_Police) November 22, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.19am GMT
block-time published-time 2.47am GMT 
 Anter Isaac named as new chair of Football Australia  
Over to football, and sports administrator and consultant Anter Isaac has today been elected chair of the board of Football Australia (FA) at the organisation’s annual general meeting. Marketing executive Jaclyn Lee-Joe is the new deputy chair. Isaac said the success of this year’s Women’s World Cup had lifted expectations for the code. “That event has had the effect of emboldening Australian football, shifting the mindset from one of hope to belief that we can actually do this, not only off the field but on the field,” he said. He said he hadn’t coveted the role, and was “humbled” when the board gave him its support. “I don’t think any sane person would covet a role that adds another, probably, 12 hours to each day.” FA hopes to win the rights to host the 2026 Women’s Asian Cup. The decision will be made by the Asian Football Confederation in coming months. At Wednesday’s press conference, FA chief executive James Johnson said he was “very confident” of securing the tournament.
    Mary Fowler of The Matildas. The new chair of the board of Football Australia, Anter Isaac, said that the success of this year’s Women’s World Cup had lifted expectations for the code. Photograph: Russell Freeman/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.56am GMT
block-time published-time 2.42am GMT 
 Michelle Rowland has just answered her final question at the press club.
She is asked about the platform X (formerly Twitter), and concerns about increasing hate speech on the platform.
 Reporter : Has the platform been responsive to the Australian government and would you go a step further and urge Australians not to use the platform?
Rowland said she wouldn’t comment on ongoing legal matters involving X, but today’s cyber safety consultation announcement involves looking at hate speech:
This will be the first time under the basic online safety expectations that we will have a requirement on the platforms to report against what they may have or their own systems and policies for regulating hate speech.
I do believe this is an area that has been underdone for too long. It is clearly an area of concern, it threatens our social cohesion, particularly in the current environment. 
 The government has determined that we need to take action in this area. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.43am GMT
block-time published-time 2.33am GMT 
Changing from online world to print media, Michelle Rowland is asked what the government is doing to ensure the survival of rural and regional newspapers, which are facing declining revenue and increasing costs.
Rowland said the government has assisted with a number of immediate cashflow issues, and expects to announced a news media assistance program in the “near future”.
That is based on research that is being informed by the ACMA’s work around diversity and areas where for so many years, we did not understand where the news deserts existed or where potential ones were emerging.
We will have more to say shortly in terms of our broader media reform program.
Rowland acknowledged that local newspapers are “critical for democracy” in some areas, with only one local publication existing.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.36am GMT
block-time published-time 2.29am GMT 
Guardian reporter Josh Butler asks Michelle Rowland about what is being done to prevent children from seeing gambling ads on platforms such as TikTok, and across social media.
Rowland said the government is considering the recommendations of the committee’s report into gambling promotions and “looking at this holistically”, but no decisions have been made yet:
Not only across the broadcasting space, but across the whole range of recommendations that have been made. No decisions have been made yet, but I would like to share with you that throughout this consultation process, one thing that we have been very focused on in understanding … how harmful this is for children, where it appears and what steps can be taken in response.
block-time published-time 2.26am GMT 
 eSafety commissioner working on age verification roadmap for pornographic websites, Rowland says 
 Michelle Rowland is now asked about age verification on pornography websites.
She acknowledged the work of the eSafety commissioner in working on the age verification roadmap, and said the systems that currently exist for age verification are “immature” and “carry significant risks in terms of privacy” and their ability to be implemented overall:
I want to be clear on this point – this isn’t only about accessing pornographic sites. This is about the some 30% and growing [amount] of content that children see, literally, coincidentally. They stumble across this using online platforms. It’s not something that they go looking for. It is incidental to their online experience.
 And therefore, what we are seeking to address is ensuring that the digital platforms have measures in place to minimise that from happening. 
Rowland said she has asked the eSafety commissioner to start work on the second tranche of codes to address pornographic content to ensure the industry “lifts its game”.
We want the industry to invest more in what we know can be effective age-assurance technologies.
     The communications minister, Michelle Rowland, says she wants websites to have measures in place to prevent children from accessing pornographic material. Photograph: Martyn Vickery/Alamy    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.42am GMT
block-time published-time 2.21am GMT 
The conversation moves to gambling ads, and Rowland is asked: Why can’t we just ban gambling ads online?
She said consultation is underway with a range of stakeholders to “understand the impacts in this area” and learn what changes need to be made.
I would point out that the last substantive time that this was amended, actually under the Turnbull government, actual resulted in an increase in gambling advertising. So we need to ensure that we get the policy settings right.
Rowland assures that at all times, she is guided by the “principles of harm minimisation”:
We’re consulting widely with a range of experts in this area. We understand the community concern. I’ve made it clear that the status quo cannot continue, and we will have more to say on this in due course. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.22am GMT
block-time published-time 2.16am GMT 
 Rowland is asked whether the misinformation bill would include religious exemptions, and what this would look like.
She said the government will “work through precisely what those exemptions will be”:
We understand that there has been concern from a variety of faith organisations that their religious views should not be considered as part of this. We are working through that at the moment and we’ll have more to say in due course.
Rowland is also asked if she will retain the exemption for political parties within the misinformation bill:
There have been calls for exemptions to be removed, including when it comes to authorised election material and also as it applies to media services as well. I’ve made it clear that those exemptions are in there for a reason. It’s because they are regulated elsewhere in different laws.
     The federal minister for communications, Michelle Rowland, at the National Press Club today.  Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.21am GMT
block-time published-time 2.13am GMT 
And with that, Rowland has concluded her speech and is now taking questions from reporters.
She is asked about a point she made in her speech – that we’ve seen a surge of Islamophobia and anti-semitism on online platforms.
Moderator Laura Tingle :
Doesn’t that suggest that the responsibility isn’t being taken seriously and throw into question the idea that a voluntary code is sufficient?
 Rowland :
I think you’re correct, and that is why we are addressing this gap in the framework by updating the expectations to include what the platforms are doing in relation to their own policies about minimising the impact of hate speech.
This is a gap in the regulatory framework. It’s one that a number of jurisdictions are grappling with, and it’s one that I look forward to taking measures on as part of this updating of the basic online safety expectations.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.14am GMT
block-time published-time 2.05am GMT 
 Michelle Rowland has announced she has appointed Delia Rickard to conduct a comprehensive review of the Online Safety Act, with consultation to begin next year.
Announcing this, Rowland said Australia’s legislative framework needs to do more than “just play catch-up” and incentivise platforms to have protections built-in, as new harms have emerged online and intensified.
She said the Online Safety Act provides protections for individuals who have been targeted by online abuse, but there is no mechanism to address “harmful abuse directed at communities on the basis of their religion or their ethnicity”.
There is deep concern across the community about the way hateful language spreads online, including recent reporting about the rise in antisemitic and Islamophobic rhetoric.
Over the past two years, it’s become harder to distinguish between AI-generated images and genuine ones. And while this technology has incredible potential as a positive tool, it has also been used to create images designed to humiliate, embarrass or even abuse others.
Australia needs our legislative framework to be strong, but also flexible enough to respond to an ever evolving space.
Rickard is a former deputy chair of the ACCC.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.11am GMT
block-time published-time 1.58am GMT 
 Michelle Rowland has announced the federal government will commence consultation to “strengthen Australia’s basic online safety expectations”.
To address gaps, emerging harms and further clarify the government’s expectations of industry.
Under the proposed changes, Rowland said services using generative AI would be expected to “proactively minimise the extent to which AI can be used to produce unlawful and harmful material”.
The government is also proposing an expectation that industry consider “the best interests of children” in the design and operation of their services.
Consultation on the proposed amendments commences today and I invite submissions before February 16, 2024.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.59am GMT
block-time published-time 1.55am GMT 
 Michelle Rowland is speaking about a roundtable she convened on the matter of online dating safety.
She said that in September, she formally requested dating platforms operating in Australia develop a new voluntary industry code to better protect Australian users.
Dating industry representatives met earlier this week to progress this work with support from my department, and I look forward to an update on next steps.
Rowland acknowledged the popularity of dating apps in Australia but said people need to be able to engage with them safely.
She expects the code to be in place by the middle of next year.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.56am GMT
block-time published-time 1.51am GMT 
Returning to communication minister Michelle Rowland ’s National Press Club speech:
She said her approach to online safety has three anchors – the first: addressing the power and information imbalance by increasing the transparency and accountability of platforms and services.
Second: acknowledging that harm manifests differently in the online environment to how it manifests offline, and using this to inform policy.
There is a difference between a young person having a bad experience in the schoolyard, and being subjected to a deluge of round-the-clock abuse and harassment over social media. There is a difference between visiting a local pub and placing a bet, and being home alone betting online. There is a difference between how information spreads when it is shared between neighbours, to when it goes viral on social media.
And third: working with researchers and experts as they better understand the impacts on human physiology and psychology.
She pointed to online radicalisation, saying that more young people are being radicalised, and the age at which that happens is getting younger:
 The ASIO director general’s annual general [meeting] last night highlighted that the number of minors being radicalised is getting higher, while the age of the minors being radicalised is getting lower, with children as young as 13 now embracing extremism and, critically, that most of the radicalisation occurs online.
     The federal minister for communications, Michelle Rowland, at the National Press Club today. Photograph: Lukas Coch/AAP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.12am GMT
block-time published-time 1.44am GMT 
 Search suspended for radio show host missing in ‘croc country’ 
A search for a former Sydney radio show host who went missing while fishing  at a remote river known for crocodiles has been suspended, AAP reports.
Police have been looking for ex-2GB presenter Roman Butchaski, 76, for more than a week at Cape York’s Olive River, in Queensland’s far north.
An extensive land and air search was launched when the popular former fishing show host did not return to his camping ground at Bramwell Station on 12 November.
He had left for a solo fishing trip on the river, about 900km north of Cairns.
Police have confirmed they had suspended the extensive search which also featured emergency services, SES volunteers and wildlife officers, along with a helicopter crew.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.49am GMT
block-time published-time 1.42am GMT 
Rowland argues that regulation within the communication sector should be “proportionate, and not stifle innovation”.
But most importantly, it needs to be human-centred.
… The most critical task I have is to support innovative communications service provision that is in the public interest. That helps lift people up and make the country better, while minimising harms and respecting community standards.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44am GMT
block-time published-time 1.38am GMT 
 Communications minister 'dedicated' to reducing online harms  
The communications minister, Michelle Rowland, is addressing the national press club today.
Rowland said she will be outlining her reform program and initiatives to improve online safety throughout today’s address.
She also highlighted recent research from her department showing 58% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are more likely to experience online harms than non-Indigenous people, at 32%.
Both of these figures are unacceptable, as is the gap between them.
I am dedicated to addressing these harms and improving digital inclusion for First Nations Australians more generally.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44am GMT
block-time published-time 1.33am GMT 
 23 arrested at pro-Palestine rally in Sydney last night  
We contacted NSW police earlier regarding last night’s pro-Palestine rally  at Botany Bay, amid accusations from civil liberties groups that the police response was “heavy-handed”.
A NSW police spokesperson said because the matters are now before the court, they are unable to provide additional commentary.
The NSW police force recognises and supports the rights of individuals and groups to exercise their rights of free speech and peaceful assembly, however, the first priority for NSW police is always the safety and security of the wider community.
Twenty-three people were arrested and charged following last night’s protest, where police say a move-on direction was not followed.
The Guardian understands two people have been refused bail to appear at Downing Centre local court today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.38am GMT
block-time published-time 1.27am GMT 
 Lehrmann seeking ‘substantial’ damages over The Project broadcast, lawyer says 
The Project’s producer gave former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann one weekend to respond to an upcoming broadcast which was weeks in the making and already “set in stone”, the federal court has heard.
The subsequent broadcast on Channel Ten of an interview with Brittany Higgins by Lisa Wilkinson was viewed live by 725,000 people and by a further 200,000 on the internet before it was taken down – at which time the “poison would have spread”, Lehrmann’s barrister Matthew Richardson said.
“My client has been publicly maligned, as certainly the most prominent rapist, probably one of the more revolting predators in the recent history of this country,” Richardson said on day one of the defamation trial Lehrmann brought against Ten and Wilkinson.
Mr Lehrmann has lost everything. A substantial award of damages will be called for, accompanied by a written judgement, particularly critical in this case, vindicating Mr Lehrmann.
Richardson said an earlier article written by Samantha Maiden for news.com.au  “did not identify the assailant as a senior adviser to [Liberal senator Karen] Reynolds ”, or indeed as someone who worked in her office at all, and was therefore not part of this defamation suit.
The case continues.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.34am GMT
block-time published-time 1.02am GMT 
 Creation of student ombudsman among recommendations to tackle campus violence 
Establishing Australia’s first independent student ombudsman is one of seven actions outlined in a draft plan to tackle gender-based violence on campuses.
The draft action plan, developed by a working group on university governance, was presented to education ministers during a meeting yesterday and released publicly this morning.
During the meeting, ministers were briefed by the chair of the working group Our Watch CEO, Patty Kinnersly,  and survivor advocates.
The plan outlines seven actions to address sexual assault and harassment, including an independent watchdog separate to the current regulator, a whole-of-sector approach to address gender-based violence via a national code to be tabled in parliament and greater transparency of disclosures.
The education minister,  Jason Clare, said ministers were now seeking feedback on the plan to inform potential design of the proposals:
All students and staff should feel and be safe on campus and in residential colleges. More needs to be done to make this possible, and more needs to be done to support students and staff when the worst happens.
This draft action plan sets out the potential reforms to achieve this. I particularly thank the victim-survivor advocates and students involved in its development.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.07am GMT
block-time published-time 12.58am GMT 
 Plane crash search uncovers suspected human remains in Port Phillip Bay 
Victorian police have discovered what is believed to be human remains in Port Phillip Bay, as they continue to investigate a plane crash at Mount Martha on Sunday.
According to a statement, the remains are believed to be the missing occupants of the plane, a 56-year-old Brunswick man and a 30-year-old Surrey Hills man.
Pilot Stephen Gale and his passenger, cameraman James Rose, were onboard one of two light Viper S-211 Marchetti planes conducting a formation flight that collided mid-air about 1.45pm on Sunday.
 Related:  Port Phillip plane crash: Victoria police believe camera operator and pilot were killed after mid-air collision
Yesterday, police located the wreckage off the shore of Mornington.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.08am GMT
block-time published-time 12.51am GMT 
More details via AAP :
The chopper was owned and operated by Outback Wrangler star Matt Wright ’s company Helibrook, which the bureau found had made a number of errors.
The report said the operator was not using a proper safety management system to “systematically identify and manage operational hazards”.
The investigation also found the aviation regulator had banned the use of sling uses at any height, but had granted Helibrook an exemption to conduct crocodile collecting.
By 2017, all safety conditions limiting height, speed and exposure were removed by the regulator, meaning Wilson could be attached to the helicopter up to 100 feet.
Months after the accident, the ATSB referred the case to the Australian Federal Police, recommending police probe the issue in regards to evidence available in the investigation.
Wright, 44 and his pilot Michael Burbidge were allegedly first on scene, accompanied by former senior police officer Neil Mellon.
block-time published-time 12.47am GMT 
 Outback Wrangler’s chopper death caused by lack of fuel 
The pilot of a helicopter that crashed – killing a crocodile catcher from the hit TV show Outback Wrangler – likely did not refuel the aircraft, causing the engine to stop mid-air, AAP reports, citing a report released today.
The bureau also found the pilot’s “exposure to cocaine” in the previous days increased the likelihood of fatigue and inattention, but there was insufficient evidence to determine if he was affected at the time.
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau released its report today, almost 21 months after Chris Wilson plunged to his death in a remote area of the Northern Territory.
The 34-year-old died while on a crocodile egg hunting mission in West Arnhem Land when a Robinson R44 helicopter he was attached to by a 30-metre line using a harness crashed.
The ATSB investigation found the chopper’s engine stopped mid-flight and during the emergency landing, pilot Sebastian Robinson released the hooks and sling line during the emergency landing.
The height of the release, which was above nine metres, was “likely not survivable” for Wilson, ATSB chief commissioner Angus Mitchell found:
Based on analysis of fuel samples and other evidence, the ATSB investigation found that the helicopter was likely not refuelled at a fuel depot about three-quarters of the way between Darwin and the crocodile egg hunting area.
The pilot did not identify the reducing fuel state before the helicopter’s engine stopped due to fuel exhaustion.
block-time published-time 12.46am GMT 
 Cyber threats will only get worse, home affairs minister says at strategy launch 
Home affairs minister Clare O’Neil is speaking to media about the government’s new seven-year strategy on cybersecurity.
The strategy sets out the development of six “cyber shields” – strong businesses and citizens, safe technology, world-class threat sharing and blocking, protected critical infrastructure, sovereign capabilities and resilient region and global leadership.
    Australia can’t continue ignoring the growing risk of cyber threats, says O’Neil.  Photograph: Mick Tsikas/AAP   
 Sarah Basford Canales brought us all the details on the blog early this morning. 
Speaking to the media now, O’Neil explains each of these cyber shields in detail:
If we have learned anything in the last year in this country, it is that we cannot continue as we have. We can’t have a situation where we have data flying around the country, where we have critical infrastructure starting to fail, where we have small business and citizens who are continually telling us they feel vulnerable and unable to cope with the cyber threats...
… The launch of today’s document is really about the future, because we know that as bad as the cyber environment is for us right now, we have reason to believe that things are going to get worse, and that we are going to face increasing risk.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.57am GMT
block-time published-time 12.39am GMT 
 Federal, NSW governments combine to support new batteries 
New South Wales has set up a scheme to support the development of big batteries with 380 megawatts, as part of its roadmap to renewables. The Albanese government in June said it would support the state as part of its capacity investment scheme, expanding the scale to 930MW.
After considering tenders, that scheme will now support even more capacity, with energy ministers Chris Bowen and  Penny Sharpe today announcing six projects have been selected to supply 1075MW of capacity. That’s roughly the operating capacity of AGL ‘s Liddell coal-fired power plant when it finally shut in April.
    AGL plans to transform its Liddell coal-fired power station into a new low-carbon industrial energy hub.  Photograph: Roni Bintang/Getty Images   
As it happens, AGL was one of the six successful bidders, with its plans for a 500MW battery at that Liddell site. (The next largest was a 415MW battery to be built in the central west renewable energy zone by Akyasha Energy.)
None of the six batteries have reached final investment decisions but the scheme, which guarantees a minimum price as part of a long-term energy supply agreement (LTESA), makes it more likely they will proceed.
AGL’s Chief Operating Officer  Markus Brokhof  says:
We continue to progress the development of the Hunter Energy Hub and the Liddell battery, and we are working towards making a final decision this calendar year.
In August, this year we opened AGL’s first owned and operated grid-scale battery at Torrens island in Adelaide.
meanwhile, NSW working towards getting as much generation and storage capacity as possible online by the summer of 2025-26. Given Origin Energy has scheduled to close its 2880MW coal-fired power plant at Eraring by August 2025, the government wants to have options in case that plant’s life doesn’t get extended.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.50am GMT
block-time published-time 12.31am GMT 
Severe storms remain forecast for parts of New South Wales and Queensland today, with heavy rainfall and flash flooding possible.
In NSW, the northern inland area can expect severe storms:
enltr?? Storm Forecast for today Wed 22/11. Severe storms are possible for the Northern Inland. Primary hazard is Heavy Rainfall and potential flash flooding, with a secondary risk of damaging wind gusts and large hail. https://t.co/Ss766eSCrL pic.twitter.com/z4oKjURecD
 — Bureau of Meteorology, New South Wales (@BOM_NSW) November 22, 2023
In Queensland, severe storms are possible through much of the interior of the state:
enltr??QLD Storm Forecast for today Wed 22/11. Severe storms possible through much of the interior of the state and inland South East QLD. Primary hazard is Heavy Rainfall with possible flash flooding, with the added risk of damaging wind gusts in the north. https://t.co/CinugnxqkN pic.twitter.com/C9hlzHXnjl
 — Bureau of Meteorology, Queensland (@BOM_Qld) November 22, 2023
block-time published-time 12.23am GMT 
 Victoria police contact scores of witnesses for Daylesford pub car crash investigation 
Victoria Police are contacting about 140 witnesses as part of an investigation into the Daylesford pub crash that killed five people earlier this month, the state’s coroners court has heard.
The collision killed five people from two families after a white BMW SUV crashed through a busy beer garden in the regional Victorian town on 5 November.
Det Sgt Peter Romanis, from Victoria Police’s major collision investigation unit, appeared at a directions hearing about the crash at the coroner’s court this morning.
He says the investigation is still in its infancy.
We are in the process of contacting in the vicinity of 140 witnesses, obtaining statements and collecting evidence.
Romanis says it is not possible to estimate how long it would take to determine if charges will be laid.
He says police are investigating the extent to which the driver’s medical condition of diabetes was a factor in the collision.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.30am GMT
block-time published-time 12.22am GMT 
 Greens’ Shoebridge: Mounted police, riot squad action against protestors “aggressive” 
Greens senator David Shoebridge said he has “deep concerns” about police actions at last night’s pro-Palestine protest at Botany Bay.
In a series of posts to X/Twitter, Shoebridge said a “communal meal and direct action on a road were responded to by the riot squad and police on horseback”.
    Members of Sydney’s Palestinian community protesting at Port Botany on Tuesday are among the many Australians, including Palestinians and Israelis, who want to see an end to the conflict in the Gaza Strip.  Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images    
The protest by members of the Jewish and Palestinian communities, unionists, students and families brought hundreds together at the port. They received move on directions, which were then aggressively enforced by NSW Police.
Police have now decided to make the first use of harsh new anti-protest laws recently rammed through the NSW Parliament by Labor and the Coalition, with numerous protestors facing up to two years in jail for their peaceful action.
People must be allowed to peacefully show their support for Palestinian freedom and for an end to war without being violently arrested by police. We stand ready to provide whatever support we can to the protesters.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.43am GMT
block-time published-time 12.20am GMT 
 ‘We must never forget the Holocaust’, Albanese says at Melbourne museum reopening 
 Anthony Albanese said he was honoured to be at the museum’s reopening, because: “we must never forget the Holocaust. Not the scale of it, not the depths of its cruelty. A savagery that was long in the planning and cold in its calculation.”
Albanese noted the words of Holocaust survivor Peter Gaspar, quoting his oft-repeated words that “The Holocaust didn’t start with gas chambers and murders and executions. It started with stereotyping, prejudice, discrimination, hate speech”. Albanese said they were “words to heed, every day.”
My government is acting to make it clear there is no place in Australia for symbols that glorify the horrors of the Holocaust. And there is no place for those who seek to profit from the trade in these evil symbols, or use them to promote their hatred. We owe it to our multicultural society, our Jewish community, and our survivors.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.35am GMT
block-time published-time 12.18am GMT 
 Australia will always denounce antisemitism, Albanese says 
Prime minister Anthony Albanese says Jewish Australians are “bearing a pain you should never have had to bear again”, saying the federal government wouldn’t allow antisemitism to gain “so much as a foothold” in this country.
Speaking at the reopening of Melbourne’s holocaust museum, in a rare bipartisan moment with opposition leader Peter Dutton, Albanese drew parallels between the extermination of Jews by Nazi Germany in the Second world war and the 7 October attacks on Israelis by Hamas.
In a speech, he says:
Since the atrocities of October 7, Jewish Australians have been bearing a pain you should never have had to bear again. And you are feeling fear. Anxious that the long shadows of the past have crept into the present.
That should not be happening in a land that offered refuge then – and embraces you now. As the conflict continues, antisemitism is on the rise. But we will not let it find so much as a foothold here. Australia will always denounce it and reject it utterly, just as we do all forms of racism and prejudice.
Earlier, in an interview with Sky News, deputy Liberal leader Sussan Ley accused the government of sending “mixed messages” on responding to antisemitism. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25am GMT
block-time published-time 12.11am GMT 
 Ex-Liberal staffer Lehrmann wants compensation from Network Ten, court hears  
Former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann is seeking justice, vindication and compensation after a broadcast by Network Ten, The Project and Lisa Wilkinson “utterly destroyed him”, the federal court has heard.
“There were no eyewitnesses, no audiovisual recording, no audio recording, no admissions, just two competing versions” of what happened when Lehrmann and his former colleague Brittany Higgins entered Canberra’s parliament house in the early hours in March 2019, Lehrmann’s legal team says.
He understands that he can’t persuade everybody, but following the withdrawal of the criminal proceedings against him he brings these proceedings against his most prominent accusers, Channel 10 and Lisa Wilkinson, and The Project.
He will say what happened to him, he will submit himself to cross examination and he will seek vindication and compensation.
Lehrmann and Wilkinson are sitting in the front row of the Sydney court.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.25am GMT
block-time published-time 12.01am GMT 
 Spender asks school children in pro-Palestine strikes to think about impact on Jewish students 
Independent MP Allegra Spender has called on children participating in school strikes for Palestine to rethink these demonstrations.
In a series of posts to X/Twitter, Spender said these protests “risk isolating Jewish children who are already so frightened by antisemitism that many are choosing to hide their identity”.
Australians are distressed by civilian deaths in Israel and Gaza. It is heartbreaking. But we can’t let the conflict overseas create conflict here amongst us, and our children.
I urge all students to give some thought to the impact their actions may have on the mental health of their classmates, and look for ways to unify. We should all be doing all we can to maintain the social harmony that’s at the heart of this great multicultural country.
enltrSchool protests for Palestine risk isolating Jewish children who are already so frightened by rising antisemitism that many are choosing to hide their identity. 2/3
— Allegra Spender (@spenderallegra) November 21, 2023
A school strike for Palestine is planned for Melbourne tomorrow, with participating students planning to walk out of school at lunchtime and join a protest in the CBD.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.06am GMT
block-time published-time 11.54pm GMT 
 ‘Heavy-handed’ NSW police action at Sydney protest worries civil liberty groups 
A joint statement from the NSW Council for Civil Liberties, Human Rights Law Centre and Australian Democracy Network says they are “deeply concerned” about the “heavy-handed police repression of a peaceful protest” at Port Botany last night.
The statement says the protest of 400 people included children and elderly people. It claims protesters were not allowed to march on the road, but were instead moved to a roadside path, and that no vehicles attempted to enter via the road during this time.
When the protest paused near this driveway and protestors were peacefully sitting on the ground, police issued ‘move on’ orders and began arresting attendees. Legal observers and others on the scene did not witness a reason being given for the move on orders.
The statement says the groups are concerned that police issued ‘move on’ orders and arrested individuals for allegedly failing to comply “when no serious risk to safety was present and no traffic was observed to be obstructed”.
Mounted police advanced on the crowd in a way that resulted in a crowd crush, with several protestors having to climb over a fence to avoid being trampled by police horses.
Police also physically pushed several independent legal observers and obstructed their capacity to observe.
 Lydia Shelly, President of the NSW Council for Civil Liberties, says:
The right to protest needs to be protected, even if protests are considered disruptive, controversial or inconvenient … The anti protest laws must be repealed if NSW is to be an open and free state.
NSW premier Chris Minns earlier rejected claims  that police were heavy-handed in the way they arrested protesters. NSW Police have been contacted for comment.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.13am GMT
block-time published-time 11.46pm GMT 
 Lehrmann defamation proceedings against Network Ten will be live-streamed 
The federal court has rejected Network Ten’s submission to not live-stream the defamation proceedings brought against it by former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann.
 Justice Michael Lee said:
Despite these arguments, I’ve reached the clear view that the administration of justice is best served and facilitated by the court adopting the now common course of live streaming the hearing of this case and rejecting Network Ten’s proposed alternative orders.
Lee said he made his decision because “open justice should not yield to the hypothetical risk of abuse by bad actors”.
The appropriate live streaming of the proceedings of public importance facilitates open justice in the modern courtroom.
Lehrmann did not oppose the live streaming of the trial.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.35pm GMT 
 Newington receives ‘overwhelming’ support from parents to co-educational decision 
Prestigious Sydney boys school Newington College says it has had an “overwhelmingly positive” response to the announcement it will progressively move to co-educational after 160 years of single-sex schooling.
In a letter to the Newington community last night, chairman of its council Tony McDonald said it had received more than 280 registrations from prospective girls - more than 50 times the number of registrations on an average day.
By midnight last night, we had received 68 emails to our dedicated mailbox, more than 70% of them positive and supportive of the change, and many of them asking how to enrol their daughters.
On Monday, it was announced the inner west college would phase to co-educational by 2033, starting with prep schools in 2026 and senior campus in 2028. It follows a similar announcement from legacy single sex school Cranbrook last year.
In response to a backlash amongst sectors of the community, McDonald says the “future is co-educational”.
While we are excited about the change and the overwhelmingly positive response it has received, we also appreciate that there are some in our community who disagree with this decision.
We appreciate that everyone is entitled to their view, however we know from all the work conducted since February 2022 that the best interests of Newington and its students in the future is co-educational and one that prepares all our students for an enriching, positive and thriving future beyond their time at school.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.29pm GMT 
 Fewer arrests as school leavers behave themselves at Gold Coast, police say 
Queensland police have praised the behaviour of schoolies on the Gold Coast this year, with a quarter of arrests compared with 2022.
    Celebrating Schoolies Week on the Gold Coast to mark the end of high school is a rite of passage for many Australian students. Photograph: Sergio Dionisio/Getty Images   
Ten school leavers have been arrested this year, compared with 40 at the same time last year. Three knives have been found as part of police operations.
A high police presence has been active in the area, with more than 180 safety cameras in operation across Surfers Paradise.
State minister for police Mark Ryan labelled Queensland’s schoolies season one of the “safest celebrations in the nation”.
Superintendent Peter Miles  said the body had been “exceptionally impressed” with this year’s cohort.
I encourage all schoolies to continue celebrating safely and look out for each other for the remainder of the event.
 Related:  From excessive drinking to a ‘self-care journey’: how the schoolies tradition is shifting
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.09am GMT
block-time published-time 11.23pm GMT 
 ABC settles with Lehrmann  
The ABC has settled the defamation case brought against it by former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann and the case has been discontinued, the federal court has heard.
On the first day of Lehrmann’s defamation case against the ABC and the Ten network, the ABC and Lehrmann told the court they had settled and the parties had signed a deed of settlement.
The defamation case against the ABC is over a 2022 National Press Club speech by Brittany Higgins.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.19pm GMT 
 Perth heatwave prompts extreme fire warnings  
Extreme and high fire danger ratings are in place for Perth and surrounding suburbs today and a number of total fire bans are in place as the city continues to face a heatwave.
The heatwave began yesterday and is set to continue through tomorrow, with high temperatures continuing through the remainder of the week.
Maximum temperatures are forecast to hit 39C today and 40C on Thursday.
This comes as an emergency storm warning is in place for parts of the Lower West and South West districts.
Damaging wind gusts of around 90km/h are likely over parts of the south-west of the state, and are expected to ease below warning thresholds by midday.
Locations which may be affected include Armadale, Harvey, Kalamunda, Midland and Pinjarra.
    Perth temperatures are forecast to reach 39C today and 40C on Thursday. Photograph: David Dare Parker/The Guardian    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.07pm GMT 
Former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann remained silent as he arrived at court this morning, Tamsin Rose reports:
enltrFormer Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann remains silent as he arrives in court. pic.twitter.com/hlJbqKoO3R
 — Tamsin Rose (@tamsinroses) November 21, 2023
Lehrmann’s defamation trial against Ten and the ABC starts today.
block-time published-time 10.47pm GMT 
 All militaries should operate in ‘safe and professional’ way – Wong 
Asked about the incident at a press conference in India, Penny Wong said Australia’s “utmost priority” was the safety of its military personnel.
The second point I’d make is to again reiterate that we have raised our serious concerns with the Chinese authorities, following what was, we regard, as unsafe and unprofessional interaction with the PLA Navy destroyer.
I would again make the point that these events occurred within Japan’s EEZ [exclusive economic zone] and in international waters. And Australia’s principal position is that we expect all countries, including ourselves, to operate militaries in a safe and a professional manner.
Wong was with India’s foreign minister, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar. The pair were asked more broadly about China’s place in the world and the Pacific.
Wong responded:
Certainly we both have a very substantive economic relationship with China, and China is a country with whom we will continue to engage.
The way in which we describe it is we will cooperate where we can and there are areas where we can, we will disagree where we must and we will engage in our national interests, and that is the way in which we have described our approach to the relationship with China.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.56pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.44pm GMT 
 Australia in international waters during China ship altercation, Wong reiterates 
Foreign minister Penny Wong has again confirmed that the altercation between Australian and Chinese naval ships last week occurred in international waters in Japan’s exclusive economic zone, after Beijing defence officials appeared to question that claim in response yesterday.
Wong, speaking in New Delhi on an official visit to India, again urged “all countries” to operate their militaries in a “safe and professional manner”.
The incident last Tuesday, which defence minister Richard Marles reported included a Chinese destroyer using sonar in the area where Australian divers were working, has led to a public tit-for-tat between Beijing and Canberra.
The Australian government says it raised the “dangerous and unprofessional” incident through official channels.
However, in an article published by state newspaper The Global Times yesterday, Chinese Ministry of National Defense spokesperson Wu Qian said his country was “firmly opposed” to Australia’s response.
According to the Global Times report:
China and Japan have not carried out maritime delimitation in the relevant waters, so the claim of Chinese military activity in “Japan’s exclusive economic zone” is not correct, the spokesperson stressed.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.39pm GMT 
 Minns rejects claims police heavy-handed with Port Botany pro-Palestinian protesters  
The NSW premier has been speaking to the media about last night’s pro-Palestine rally at Port Botany.
 Chris Minns begins by thanking NSW police for their efforts, noting they had managed 73 protests in the past six weeks across the state.
He said “no city in the world has been handling this perfectly” – in terms of demonstrations related to the Israel-Hamas war – but that NSW police “have been doing a very good job in very difficult circumstances”.
Minns said he rejected claims the police were heavy-handed in the way they arrested protesters yesterday:
Firstly, the protest went mobile. Secondly, they occupied a street without lodging a form-1 declaration. Thirdly, there was a lawful police order given to the protesters to move on.
I think any reasonable person would say once you stack up that chronology, the police acted completely responsible in the same set of circumstances.
You cannot have a situation where our ports are blocked for commerce because one group or another has a political disagreement with another country. That would be hugely damaging to our economy and it would be massively damaging to the reputation of both the state and the country.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.32pm GMT 
 Coalition accuses Labor of sending ‘mixed messages’ on antisemitism response 
Deputy Liberal leader Sussan Ley accused the government of sending “mixed messages” on responding to antisemitism, hours ahead of what’s meant to be a bipartisan message against antisemitism from her leader Peter Dutton and prime minister Anthony Albanese at a holocaust memorial.
The Australian reports the leaders will speak at the reopening of Melbourne Holocaust Museum today, with a drop of Dutton’s speech outlining that he’ll call for “a need for unequivocal and unqualified condemnation of the anti-Semitism we are witnessing” in the wake of the conflict in Gaza.
Speaking on Sky News earlier, Ley was asked about comments from government minister Stephen Jones, who said the government had condemned both antisemitism and Islamophobia. Labor MPs in parliament last week spoke strongly about the need to support both Jewish and Muslim communities.
“I think there have been some mixed messages from government ministers and I think even Steven Jones would admit that,” Ley responded.
But today when Peter Dutton joins Anthony Albanese at the Melbourne Holocaust Museum, it is a time for strong bipartisanship, a strong message that comes from both the Leader of the Opposition and the Prime Minister that is clear, and unequivocal, and demonstrates the moral clarity that I believe Peter Dutton has demonstrated from day one on this issue.
Ley was critical of “acts of intimidation and protest on our streets”, noting convoys of cars and protests situated around Jewish population centres.
While everyone knows, you can protest in Australia and that’s something we fundamentally believe in, when that protest turns into convoys driving across suburbs, or individual places of worship being targeted, then that does approach intimidation, and that is not on.
The social cohesion that has built this country in which all Australians value is something we must put front and centre, when it comes to these issues.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.35pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.22pm GMT 
 Australia failing mental health patients, report finds 
The country’s health system is continuing to fail patients suffering from poor mental health, with more patients needing acute care and facing long waits in emergency departments, a report has found. The Australian Medical Association’s (AMA’s) public hospital report card: mental health edition  shows more patients with mental health-related conditions are arriving in emergency departments by ambulance and police services, and more are arriving in a critical condition needing urgent care. The report found nationally, the length of stay in emergency departments for patients presenting with mental health-related conditions was at its highest since 2016–17, with patients staying in for more than 30 hours in some states.
    More mental health patients are arriving in hospital emergency departments in a critical condition needing urgent care, a report has found. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP   
AMA president Prof Steve Robson said:
These long waits, which are directly due to a lack of inpatient beds, cause distress for patients and their families and place enormous pressure on hospital staff. Emergency departments are no place for someone suffering a critical mental health illness. They are not designed in a way that’s conducive to good mental health care. Australia is failing to provide appropriate, acceptable care to these most vulnerable of patients. This needs to change, and it needs to change urgently.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.39pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.17pm GMT 
 WWII bombs found in Queensland forest 
A routine patrol of a far north Queensland park unearthed an unexpected threat – three 80-year-old bombs from the second world war, AAP reports.
And while the 25-pound (11kg) unexploded ordnances (UXOs) were rusty, they were still potentially as deadly as ever.
Rangers were quick to alert the Australian defence force (ADF) when they came across the bombs lying in the Bilwon state forest near Cairns.
Queensland Parks and Wildlife Service ranger Ben Finnerty said a series of firebreaks through the Bilwon forest last year gave rangers better access to different parts of the area:
During a routine patrol we discovered several unexploded ordnance in a remote part of the forest.
After seeking advice from the ADF, it was decided the best move was to detonate the bombs, which were still considered dangerous despite their rusty appearance and age.
Finnerty said two members of the defence force travelled from Townsville and met rangers on site to make the UXO safe to the public, and “it went up with a bang”.
It was the first time rangers had found UXOs in the region since 2016.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.12pm GMT 
 Most motorists driving less amid soaring fuel prices, survey finds 
Seven in 10 Australian drivers have changed their driving habits amid skyrocketing fuel prices, according to new research commissioned by the Climate Council.
A national survey of 1,150 Australians found 71% are taking steps to cut their driving expenses because of soaring fuel costs. People reported driving less day-to-day, avoiding taking holidays using their car, cutting back on vehicle servicing and maintenance, and considering the switch to an electric vehicle.
Fifty-four per cent said fuel efficiency standards would save them money, the survey found.
    An analysis found Australians could each save $1,200 a year on vehicle running costs if the government introduced tougher fuel efficiency standards. Photograph: John Crux Photography/Getty Images   
The Climate Council’s head of advocacy, Dr Jennifer Rayner, said:
Many Australians are doing it tough right now, but they can see there are solutions. Strong fuel efficiency standards will mean less money drained by the petrol bowser and better access to cleaner, cheaper-to-run cars.
A recent consumer benefit analysis commissioned by the Climate Council and Electric Vehicle Council found Australians could individually save $1,200 per year, and up to $10,000 over the vehicle’s lifetime, on running costs with strong fuel efficiency standards.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.06pm GMT 
 ‘Just handle this as Aussies’, O’Neil says after Port Botany pro-Palestinian protest 
Earlier, home affairs minister Clare O’Neil was asked about last night’s pro-Palestine protest at Port Botany.
Speaking on the Today show, she spoke about footage of protesters’ alleged actions against police and said it was “absolutely despicable”.
Acknowledging people’s strong feelings amid the Israel-Hamas war, O’Neil called on people to “handle this as Aussies” and “calm down a bit”.
We have a bunch of people in our country who are feeling incredibly deeply about what is going on in the Middle East, and I understand that. For a lot of your viewers who don’t have a connection it is incredibly upsetting, but think about if you have friends or family living in Gaza, of course there is strong feelings.
What I would say to Australians is let’s just handle this as Aussies. Let’s respect each other, understand the strong views and feelings in the community, but just calm down a bit.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.55pm GMT 
 Pat Cummins still ‘buzzing’ from Cricket World Cup win as players return home 
 Pat Cummins and other Australian cricket players have begun landing back home this morning, after days of celebrations in India following their World Cup win.
Seven members of the squad have remained in India to feature in the looming Twenty20 series, while the other half have returned to prepare for the Test summer.
“I think they have created their own legacy,” Cummins said of his side as he touched down at Sydney Airport.
    Pat Cummins on arrival at Sydney airport on Wednesday.  Photograph: Dean Lewins/EPA    
A World Cup, you only get one chance every four years and especially playing somewhere like India, it’s hard.
To be pitted up against the rest of the world and come away with a medal, it doesn’t get any better than that.
Cummins said he was still “buzzing” from the win, with Sunday’s six-wicket triumph over the host nation in the final yet to fully sink in.
– from AAP
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.40pm GMT 
 Burke’s IR changes don’t fix bill’s ‘fundamental’ problems, builders association says 
Master Builders Australia CEO Denita Wawn said the building and construction industry continued to hold concerns around the government’s proposed industrial relations laws and its impact on business and tradies.
She said changes to the bill announced by minister Tony Burke this morning (which we brought you earlier on the blog here  ) don’t change “the fundamental structural problems of the bill”.
You can’t amend a few clauses and say concerns with the bill are fixed when there are 300-odd pages of damaging changes that fundamentally upend how business operates.
Minister Burke is attempting to create his own minor loopholes for a couple of specific industries while still leaving the economy high and dry.
Wawn argued the cumulative impact of the bill on the economy would be “devastating” and leave the building and construction industry “hamstrung” in its ability to meet the government’s housing targets.
Independent contractors, self-employed Australians, subcontractors and small business are still in the firing line and their rights to be their own boss are at risk.
This bill ultimately drives down productivity and drives up the cost of goods and services.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.33pm GMT 
 Government considered deporting indefinite detention plaintiff, O’Neil confirms 
The home affairs minister, Clare O’Neil, has spoken to Radio National about Labor’s cyber security strategy. In the interview O’Neil also confirmed our exclusive report  that the government considered releasing the plaintiff in the high court challenge against indefinite detention.
O’Neil said the government “looked at every possible option in order to improve our chances of winning this high court challenge”, including “operational and policy moves”.
O’Neil said the record was clear that “he was not released from detention and we did not go down that pathway, but I’m not going to apologise for doing everything I could within my power to make sure that we didn’t”. 
She said the report the government considered releasing the plaintiff NZYQ was “accurate”.
O’Neil also repeated her claim that when she said on Sunday the government was advised by the home affairs department it was “likely” to win the case, she “was not referring to legal advice when I made comments about prospects in that case”. Instead, she claims she was referring to “operational and policy conversations” that “might potentially change the outcome of the case, specifically could we remove the plaintiff from the country”.
O’Neil “vehemently disagreed” with RN host Patricia Karvelas’ suggestion the government was “flat-footed” in its response, insisting it “absolutely contemplated and planned for that we would not win”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.37pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.20pm GMT 
Last week, the government passed laws to enable it to impose curfews and ankle bracelets on people released from immigration detention.
 Related:  Ankle bracelets, curfews and criminal penalties in Labor response to release of immigration detainees
Home affairs minister Clare O’Neil was asked on the Today show whether “ankle bracelets, curfews [and] bans on working with children” had started. She said:
Yes, they have … they are being rolled out at the moment.
I certainly know that many people have had those curfews and monitoring bracelets rolled out. If I can just explain to your viewers, minister [Andrew] Giles is required under law to consider each of these base cases on an individual basis, and he is working through that at the moment.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.06pm GMT 
Here are some more photos from last night’s pro-Palestine protest at Port Botany:
    Australian Palestinian community members hold placards while on a jet ski and on the shoreline during the protest. Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images      Protesters at Port Botany. Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images      Demonstrators at the rally. A pro-Palestine group had earlier said it would demonstrate against a ZIM container ship. Photograph: James D Morgan/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.20pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.01pm GMT 
 ‘Desperation’ among people to end ‘horrific’ situation in Gaza – Burke 
Earlier, industrial relations minister Tony Burke was asked about last night’s pro-Palestine protest in Botany Bay.
He told ABC RN he was “always wary of where some protests can morph or ignite in different ways [into] anti-semitism”, but said the view of his community is they “just want this to stop”.
Host Patricia Karvelas pressed that his community wants a ceasefire, but foreign minister Penny Wong hasn’t called for one.
Burke:
Wong has said that we need to work through the steps towards ceasefire…
I met [with] one of the Australians [we] helped get out of Gaza. When you hear the stories that are happening on the ground, it’s horrific.
And so yes, the views are very strong. I’m limited in what I can say about that particular protest, I haven’t seen the footage of that. But what I can say is there is a desperation of people wanting this to end.
Karvelas: Can’t that only happen with a ceasefire?
Burke:
I’ve repeated what Penny Wong has said about wanting those steps towards a ceasefire to be taken.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.21pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.52pm GMT 
 More than 20 charged after Port Botany pro-Palestine protest  
More than 20 people have been arrested and charged following an unauthorised pro-Palestine protest at Port Botany overnight.
According to a statement from NSW police, about 400 people gathered at the protest. Police issued a move-on direction, which they say was not complied with.
The group continued to occupy Foreshore Road, blocking vehicle movement.
The road was then closed in both directions, police say, as officers continued to issue move-on directions to several people.
Twenty-three people were arrested “after a number of people continued to refuse police direction”, and all people had left the roadway by 9pm.
Police say inquiries into the incident continue under Operation Shelter – launched after the first pro-Palestine rally in early October to coordinate police response to future protests in the state.
As we flagged in yesterday’s blog, the Palestine Justice Movement Sydney announced it would demonstrate against ZIM container ship “Calandra” as part of a series of actions targeting ZIM in Sydney and Melbourne.
ZIM shipping is the oldest and largest shipping company in Israel. Ahmed Abadla from the group said yesterday the action was occurring because “as Australians we cannot allow business as usual to continue at our ports while Israel is carrying out a genocide in Gaza and committing the crime of apartheid against my people”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.03pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.49pm GMT 
 Labor strikes deal to exempt service contractors from new workplace laws – Burke 
Industrial relations minister Tony Burke is speaking to ABC RN about Labor’s industrial relations bill.
He says he has struck a deal to exempt service contractors from the new workplace laws:
That just gives a really clear line drawn that if it’s labour hire, it’s covered, if it’s service contractors, it’s not.
The difference is as a labour hire company just provides workers, whereas a service contractor will provide machinery, their own systems and their own management, Burke explained.
This change follows weeks-long negotiations between Burke and the Australian Resources and Energy Employer Association.
There are hopes the deal will also improve the governments chances of getting the contentious legislation through the senate. Burke said:
In terms of the conversations with the crossbench, I continue to reach out to the crossbench [and] there’s a series of meetings that continue to happen.
They’ve made a decision that they don’t want to deal with this bill until next year. I would rather we were dealing with it over the next fortnight. We certainly will be dealing with it next week in the House of Representatives. 
The government has been facing a showdown with David Pocock and Jacqui Lambie over the legislation, after the two crossbenchers successfully passed four private members’ bills in the Senate:
 Related:  Labor facing showdown with Pocock and Lambie after Senate passes industrial relations bills
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.45pm GMT 
 Key event  
 Police and protesters scuffle at pro-Palestinian rally in Port Botany 
 AAP has more details on last night’s pro-Palestine rally at Port Botany:
About 400 people waving flags and calling for ceasefire in Gaza gathered near the boat ramp at Foreshore Road and were met by local and mounted police as well as members of the force’s riot squad.
According to organisers, the demonstrators were there to protest the arrival of Israeli-owned container ship Calandra.
It was the second rally at the port and also followed a protest in Melbourne on 8 November targeting trucks carrying containers owned by the same Israeli company.
    Members of the Australian Palestinian community hold a Palestinian flag at the Port Botany protest. Photograph: David Gray/AFP/Getty Images   
The gathering began peacefully but video aired by television networks showed scuffles between police and some of the crowd later in the evening.
One of the demonstrators, who gave his name as Benjamin, told Nine News “things started getting a little bit rough”.
The cops started trying to move people by dragging them.
They mostly arrested the organisers up the front who were not giving any ground.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.27pm GMT 
Victorian police have confirmed the search for the wreckage of a military-style jet that crashed into Port Phillip Bay will continue at 8am this morning.
Pilot Stephen Gale and his passenger, cameraman James Rose, were onboard one of two light Viper S-211 Marchetti planes conducting a formation flight that collided mid-air about 1.45pm on Sunday.
 Related:  Port Phillip plane crash: Victoria police believe camera operator and pilot were killed after mid-air collision
Yesterday, police located the wreckage off the shore of Mornington and were working to remove the fuselage of the plane from the water to be searched.
Police had earlier said the two people were believed to have died in the crash.
Their aircraft plunged about 20 metres into Port Phillip Bay, while the other plane landed safely at Essendon airport, also with two people onboard.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.36pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.14pm GMT 
 Matildas’ Sam Kerr engaged to US football star Kristie Mewis 
First up, some great news from overnight – Matildas star Sam Kerr has confirmed her engagement to American soccer star Kristie Mewis ! Kerr shared these photos to Instagram:
enltr?????? Sam Kerr finally confirms the worst-kept secret in woso: she's engaged to Kristie Mewis! ?? pic.twitter.com/18iWZ8bvUp
 — Samantha Lewis (@battledinosaur) November 21, 2023
The post confirmed weeks of rumours the pair were engaged, with Kerr popping the question on 1 September.
Now *this* is my Roman Empire.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.37pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.05pm GMT 
Good morning and happy Wednesday. Thanks to Martin for kicking things off – I’m Emily Wind and I’ll be bringing you our rolling news coverage today.
See something that needs attention on the blog? You can contact me via Twitter/X @emilywindwrites or send me an email: emily.wind.casual@theguardian.com
With that, let’s get started.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.58pm GMT 
 Rights groups push back against protest crackdown  
Sixty legal advocacy and civil rights groups around Australia have teamed up to call on governments to protect the right to protest in the face of recent “draconian anti-protest laws”. 
The Human Rights Law Centre (HRLC) and Australian Democracy Network on Wednesday want stronger laws to protect the freedom to protest across states and territories, along with the commonwealth.
The legal advocacy group outlined proposed minimum standards and 10 practical steps toward protecting protest rights in its report, Declaration of Our Right to Protest, released earlier this month.
The latest push follows criticism of the NSW government after it briefly vowed to block pro-Palestine rallies in Sydney last month. 
    Human rights and democracy advocates are calling for greater freedoms for public protests, such as Monday’s pro-Palestine demonstration outside the electoral office of NSW premier Chris Minns. Photograph: Bianca de Marchi/AAP   
A total of 60 groups, including Amnesty International Australia, the Australian Council of Social Service, Greenpeace Australia and the Australia Institute, have signed on to the proposed declaration.
Around 26 laws curbing protests rights have passed around the country over the past two decades, the HRLC said.
David Mejia-Canales, a senior lawyer at the HRLC, said the right to protest was “a cornerstone of a robust civil society that holds the powerful to account”, describing recent anti-protest laws as “draconian”.
When governments erode our protest rights, they erode our democracy. This declaration provides governments with solutions in law-making to create a democracy where protest rights are protected.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.50pm GMT 
 Key event  
More on cyber security from Sarah…
In addition to major funding injection, the federal government’s new cyber security strategy also proposes to establish new programs and review mechanisms.
For example, a free cyber health-check program will be created allowing small and medium businesses to assess their cyber security readiness.
The 2030 strategy also reveals that a new no-fault, no-liability ransomware reporting obligation for businesses will be co-designed with industry and legislated to help the government stay “ahead of the threat”.
Cyber incident scenarios will be run through the office of the cyber coordinator to test the strength of industry and government arrangements. The government has said it will draft up incident response “playbooks” in response to the findings to better inform business leaders on how to deal with cyber attacks.
Cyber security minister Clare O’Neil said of the announcements:
Our government is committed to consulting closely with industry every step of the way. Years of cooperative effort lie ahead, and we need to work together to make our country safe.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.40pm GMT 
 Australia to become 'world leader' in cyber security by 2030  
 Clare O’Neil has set out her ambitious vision for Australia to become a world leader in cyber security by 2030, announcing a $586.9m funding sweetener to help the country “lead the frontier”.
The seven-year strategy, released on Wednesday, sets out the development of six “cyber shields” – strong businesses and citizens, safe technology, world-class threat sharing and blocking, protected critical infrastructure, sovereign capabilities and resilient region and global leadership.
O’Neil said Australia was an attractive target due to it being wealthy and a fast adopter of new technologies.
The new strategy would help chart the country’s course to becoming a world leader against cyber crime, O’Neil said.
Our strategy will make every Australian citizen, business, government agency and organisation a harder target. It will enable us to bounce back faster from attacks that we cannot prevent. We will put cyber criminals on notice, and we will fight back against the threat.
The $586.9m funding committed will be in addition to the $2.3bn to 2030 set out for the existing Cyber Security Strategy, delivered by the Australian Signals Directorate.
The strategy’s action plan outlines the first two years, focusing on addressing critical gaps across industry and government, while the period between 2026 and 2028 will work on scaling “cyber maturity across the whole economy”.
From 2029, the action plan says, Australia will “advance the global frontier of cyber security”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.43pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.31pm GMT 
 Welcome  
Good morning and welcome to the rolling news blog. I’m Martin Farrer with some of our top overnight stories before I hand over shortly to my colleague Emily Wind.
The legal complexities around the release last week of indefinite detainees have deepened thanks to our exclusive story  this morning which reveals how the government considered releasing the man at the centre of the case – while keeping the other 92 locked up. Documents published by the high court suggest home affairs minister Clare O’Neil was advised that using her powers to grant NZYQ a visa might neutralise the court challenge that last week led to the release of 92 others. And it’s a busy day for O’Neil, who is today announcing plans to make Australia a world leader in cyber security by 2030 with a $586.9 funding boost. More coming up on these stories.
Sixty legal advocacy and civil rights groups around Australia are teaming up today to call on governments to protect the right to protest in the face of recent “draconian anti-protest laws”.  The issue has risen to the top of the political agenda amid rival mass protests by supporters of Palestine and Israel in recent weeks. New South Wales police are likely to be handed  the power to lay charges for threats and incitement to violence based on race and religion in a reform introduced to state parliament.
The cost of living is still right at the top of that political agenda as a survey reveals today how people are having to pay $600 a week to rent in Australia’s most expensive suburbs.  All of the top 10 are in Sydney, led by Warriewood in the northern beaches, although St Kilda in Melbourne is in joint 10th. Energy costs are also a burden on household expenses and a new report today shows that electricity network providers raked in $2bn from customers in “superprofits”  in just one year. More coming up on these stories as well, plus later on Reserve Bank governor Michelle Bullock is making a speech in Sydney and might have something to say about the direction of interest rates.

Load-Date: November 22, 2023


End of Document




Rightwing personalities use X to bring antisemitic theories to light in US
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 1:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: TECHNOLOGY; Version:2
Length: 1260 words
Byline: Jason Wilson
Highlight: Experts say figures like Elon Musk and Tucker Carlson bringing ‘great replacement’ theory mainstream signals growing extremism
Body


The racist and antisemitic “great replacement” theory is encroaching out of the far right and more visibly into mainstream US politics in the wake of its platforming by major figures like Elon Musk and Tucker Carlson, in a move experts believe shows the growing extremeness of rightwing politics in the US.
High-profile users of Twitter/X including rightwing personality Carlson and the platform’s proprietor Musk, are helping to mainstream extremist narratives that are increasingly prevalent on the site, experts and advocates say.
Despite Musk’s aggressive responses to organizations that criticize X for promoting extremism, white nationalists and other extremists last week took to the platform to celebrate the role of Musk, his platform and star attractions including Carlson for “shifting the Overton Window” on antisemitism.
The “great replacement” is a racist conspiracy narrative that falsely asserts there is an active, ongoing and covert effort to replace white populations in current white-majority countries. In many versions – such as those rehearsed in the manifestos of mass shooters in Christchurch, New Zealand; El Paso, Texas; and Buffalo, New York – the purported replacement is being coordinated by Jewish people.
From the middle of last week through the weekend, events on X followed a pattern that has become increasingly familiar since Musk assumed control of Twitter in October 2022: extremist remarks from Musk and other high-profile users received widespread criticism, more advertisers abandoned the platform, and Musk furiously portrayed his critics as unfairly picking on him.
On Wednesday, Musk described  another user’s claim that Jewish people had pushed “hatred against whites” and implied they were responsible for “hordes of minorities … flooding” western countries.
The comments drew condemnation from Jewish groups, media commentators and even the White House. 
Heidi Beirich, extremism expert and co-founder of the Global Project on Hate and Extremism (GPAHE ), pointed to Twitter’s response to a 31 October GPAHE report  showing that members of the white supremacist Generation Identity (GI) movement had returned to Twitter after widespread bans in 2020.
Following the report’s publication, 31 GI accounts were suspended, but 26 were reinstated within 24 hours.
“Somebody was trying to content moderate according to the rules and had the decision reversed,” Beirich argued.
“I don’t know if that’s Musk or [X CEO] Linda Yaccarino or someone else, but clearly they don’t care to impose their own rules any more when it comes to this type of hate content,” she added.
Last week, on Carlson’s self-produced show which has run on X since his acrimonious exit  from Fox News, he and guest Candace Owens discussed what they called the hypocrisy of pro-Israel donors in threatening college funding over pro-Palestinian protests after allegedly remaining silent during Black Lives Matter protests and the implementation of diversity initiatives.
At one point Owens – on the show to discuss her public feud with the Daily Wire founder Ben Shapiro  over Israel’s actions in Gaza – claimed that discussions of race on college campuses were designed to “breed white people out of the population”. Carlson asked donors: “Where were you the last 10 years when they were calling for white genocide?” Carlson later added: “You were paying for it, actually … You were calling my children immoral for their skin color, you paid for it.”
Julie Millican is vice-president of media watchdog Media Matters for America (MMFA) who said that “as far as Tucker Carlson goes, he has always been a conduit for mainstreaming the great replacement theory. He used to push it on his Fox News show all the time.”
Following Musk’s remarks, companies including IBM, Apple and NBC Universal paused advertising on the platform. Musk attributed this to an MMFA report  showing how ads from major advertisers being placed against extremist content including pro-Hitler material. Mush has threatened strong legal action against MMFA.
In conversation last week, Millican described the report as “a look at what the impact of X’s moderation decisions are, especially with an eye toward brand safety for advertisers”, explaining that MMFA was a member of the Stop Toxic Twitter  coalition “that has from the beginning advocated for advertisers to cease advertising on the site or at least pause spending until Musk would agree to rolling back moderation changes” at a site that has become a “playground for extremists”.
Musk responded by calling MMFA an “evil organization” and promised to launch a “ thermonuclear lawsuit  ” against the non-profit, blaming them for claiming that they had misrepresented user experience on X.
In an emailed statement on Monday, MMFA president Angelo Carusone said: “Far from the free speech advocate he claims to be, Musk is a bully who threatens meritless lawsuits in an attempt to silence reporting that he even confirmed is accurate. Musk admitted the ads at issue ran alongside the pro-Nazi content we identified. If he does sue us, we will win.”
Despite Musk’s pushback on claims that the site was fostering extremism, in the wake of his and Carlson’s remarks white nationalists and other far-right extremists took to X to celebrate the apparent alignment with their views.
In an X “space” (the platform’s name for real-time audio conversations) held last week, the Irish white nationalist Keith Woods and “America First” white nationalist influencer and Holocaust denier Nick Fuentes joined other extremists to celebrate the role Musk and Carlson were playing in “shifting the Overton Window” on antisemitism.
Woods came to prominence  in September when Musk replied to one of his posts attacking the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) by claiming that the Jewish organization’s “demands to ban social media accounts” made them “the biggest generators of anti-Semitism on this platform”.
Fuentes, who appeared in the Wednesday space under his latest X alias “Autumn Groyper”, attracted controversy  a year ago when he dined at Donald Trump’s Mar-a-Lago estate while working on Kanye West’s abortive presidential campaign, which itself embraced antisemitic, pro-Nazi and conspiracy-minded themes.
In the space, speakers welcomed the more permissive environment Musk had instituted on X, as well as his role in directly spreading antisemitic ideas.
In introducing the space, Woods remarked that “in a short space of time, it’s really incredible how far the conversation can move.”
Woods added: “Someone like Elon makes a comment like that, someone like Tucker, people that other kind of influencers look to and suddenly, you know, it’s OK to talk about this, it’s OK to question this.
“Very rapidly, you can see the conversation change where the fear of cancellation, the fear of being labeled an antisemite that used to totally stifle conversations around this topic, the power of that is disappearing,” Woods continued.
Later in the space, Fuentes remarked: “I think that Elon purchasing Twitter and the internet basically coming back online, that created the environment where things can happen.”
The Guardian emailed X’s press office for comment. In a return email, X press wrote: “Busy now, please check back later.”
Asked about the white nationalist response to Musk’s tenure at X, Beirich, said: “Hate content is proliferating on X. It’s coming out of the mouths of prominent personalities like Tucker Carlson and Elon Musk. Neo-Nazi accounts are gaining revenue on the site.”
Beirich added: “X is becoming one of the largest hate sites in the world.”

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Morning Mail: Labor’s secret detainee strategy, hostage release hopes in Gaza, Socceroos edge Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 8:01 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1300 words
Byline: Martin Farrer
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Morning Mail here, and finish your day with our Afternoon Update newsletter
Body


Morning, everyone. First up there is breaking news of a potential hostage release deal and ceasefire in Gaza – we have the latest as it develops.
Back on home soil, the legal complexities around the release last week of indefinite detainees have deepened in our exclusive story this morning which reveals how the government considered releasing the man at the centre of the case – while keeping the other 92 locked up. We’re also looking at the women footballers who believe they were unfairly taxed during Australia’s World Cup.
                   Australia                                                                   Power play | Electricity network providers raked in $2bn from customers in “superprofits”  in just one year, much more than was needed to compensate shareholders for risk, the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis calculates in a new report.                                                                     Exclusive | According to documents published by the high court, the government considered  releasing the man who sparked the landmark ruling on indefinite detention – even though he raped a 10-year-old boy. They suggest home affairs minister Clare O’Neil was advised that using her powers to grant NZYQ a visa might neutralise the court challenge that last week led to the release of 92 others.                                                                     Protest crackdown | New South Wales police will be handed  the power to lay charges for threats and incitement to violence based on race and religion in a reform introduced to state parliament amid rising tensions over the conflict in Gaza.                                                                     Antisemitism apology | Two of five students subjected to antisemitic bullying at a state school in Melbourne have rejected  the state education department’s apology, calling it a sham.                                                                     ‘Fifa goofed’ | Players from several teams at this year’s Women’s World Cup finals in Australia and New Zealand have earned significantly less than they hoped , as a result of a tax imposed by the ATO.                                                            World                                                                   Jet set | Private jets belonging to 200 celebrities, chief executives, oligarchs and billionaires such as the Murdoch family and the Rolling Stones have spent a combined total of 11 years in the air  since the start of 2022, public data shows.                                                                     Hostage talks | Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu was holding a war cabinet meeting this morning, Australian time, amid reports that a deal was close  to release some of the hostages held by Hamas since 7 October. Our live blog  has the latest. Qatari mediators  have been helping to broker a deal that is believed will include only women and children, in exchange for the return of Palestinian prisoners, and come with a pause in hostilities.                                                                     Offender exposed | An outreach leader for Moms for Liberty  – the US conservative parental rights group that is pushing to exclude discussion of gender and diversity from school curricula – has been exposed as a registered sex offender.                                                                      Up from the streets | A lost interview with the street artist Banksy, which contains the only known instance of him revealing his first name, has been unearthed.                                                                      Money for nothing | The legendary guitarist Mark Knopfler is selling his guitar collection  so they can have “new adventures” with new owners. Some of the proceeds will be given to charity.                                                           Full Story                   
                     The climate scientists who copped it – Weight of the world podcast, part 2                   
Three eminent climate scientists tell  of government scepticism, personal attack and death threats after raising the alarm about climate change and their disbelief that meaningful action didn’t follow the science.
                   In-depth                   
Australians are paying up to $600 a week to rent a single room in some of the country’s most expensive suburbs  as many people continue to struggle with the cost of living crisis. The top 10 priciest suburbs are all in Sydney (Mona Vale in the northern beaches pictured), new data shows, although St Kilda in Melbourne is joint 10th. It’s not all young people either, as the survey shows that the fastest growing cohort of sharers is those aged between 55 and 64. Today we hear from Claire Mulcahy, a teacher who has moved back in with her mother  because she can’t afford to rent as a single person in Sydney.
                   Not the news                   
The annual ocean photographer of the year competition has produced some extraordinary images , including this one pictured above of an octopus in an artificial reef in Port Philip Bay, Melbourne. The various winning entries also show the environmental challenges to marine life and ecosystems – from a warming climate to human development and tourism.
                   The world of sport                                                                   World Cup football | Harry Souttar headed a first-half winner  to give Australia all three points in their tricky World Cup qualifying match against Palestine played in an emotionally charged atmosphere in Kuwait overnight.                                                                     Cricket | Australia have withdrawn David Warner  from the Twenty20 series against India after the hosts named an under-strength squad.                                                                     Women’s cricket | The International Cricket Council has become the latest sports body to ban transgender players  from the elite women’s game if they have gone through male puberty.                                                           Media roundup                   
The living standards of Victorians have fallen faster than in any other state , according to the Age, due to rising mortgage costs and population growth. The cost of reconfiguring Sydney’s exclusive Newington School to make it co-ed could be as much as $100m , the Telegraph estimates. Brisbane council is being forced to cut $400m  from its budget, the Courier Mail says. 
                   What’s happening today                                                                   Sydney | Bruce Lehrmann’s defamation trial starts against Ten, ABC.                                                                     Economy | Reserve Bank of Australia governor Michele Bullock speaks at the Australian Business Economists dinner.                                                                     Sport | Football Australia annual general meeting.                                                           Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Morning Mail update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And finish your day with a three-minute snapshot of the day’s main news. Sign up for our Afternoon Update newsletter here. 
Prefer notifications? If you’re reading this in our app , just click here and tap “Get notifications” on the next screen  for an instant alert when we publish every morning.
                   Brain teaser                   
And finally, here are the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow. 
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




National living wage to rise to £11.44 an hour from April and extended to 21-year-olds – as it happened
The Guardian (London)
November 21, 2023 Tuesday 9:21 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITICS; Version:18
Length: 8944 words
Byline: Andrew Sparrow
Highlight: Treasury confirms the national living wage will increase by over a pound an hour from April
Body


block-time published-time 5.12pm GMT 
 Afternoon summary  Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, has brushed aside claims that he should have done more to force No 10 to take the Covid threat seriously in February 2020.  (See 3.24pm. )David Cameron, the new foreign secretary, has used his maiden speech in the Lords to defend his record as PM and to make a jibe about Boris Johnson’s “illusions”.  (See 4.18pm. )The Low Pay Commission has said that next year the “national living wage” will be worth two-thirds of the median wage, putting the UK “at the forefront of comparable economies”.  As the government announced it was accepting the LPC’s recommendations, which will see the main rate rise to £11.44 per hour (see 4.54pm), Bryan Sanderson, the LPC chair, said in a statement  :
The national living wage has delivered an improved standard of living to thousands of people who care for our children and elderly, work in farms and shops and at many other essential jobs. These efforts over the lifetime of the NLW mean over £9,000 PA more to a full-time worker without any increase in unemployment.
This hasn’t been easy for employers, with the economy facing a range of unprecedented challenges in recent years. The high degree of political and economic uncertainty has made assessing and forecasting the performance of the economy, and therefore our task, very difficult. It is a tribute to my fellow commissioners that we have continued to achieve consensus.
Our new recommendation of a national living wage of £11.44 attempts to steer a path through this uncertainty and achieve the government target of two-thirds of the median wage, an outcome which if accepted would position the UK at the forefront of comparable economies.
The UK government borrowed less than expected in the first seven months of the financial year as Jeremy Hunt puts the last-minute touches to a series of potential pre-election giveaways in his autumn statement on Wednesday. The outcome of the Brexit vote and years of political uncertainty it triggered has had a chilling impact on business investment in Britain, a deputy governor of the Bank of England has said. Two protesters were “reasonable” in calling Iain Duncan Smith “Tory scum” outside the Conservative party conference, the high court has ruled, in a rejection of an attempt to overturn their acquittal.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.54pm GMT 
 Hunt says 'national living wage' going up to £11.44 per hour next year  
In his speech to the Conservative party conference Jeremy Hunt, the chancellor, said the “national living wage” would be going up to at least £11 per hour.  This afternoon the Treasury has announced that, in the autumn statement tomorrow, it will rise to £11.44 per hour.  It says:
The chancellor will deliver a pay rise of more than £1,800 a year for a full-time worker, as he confirms that the national living wage will increase by over a pound an hour from April.
The almost 10% pay boost, from £10.42 to £11.44 an hour, is the biggest cash increase in the national living wage in more than a decade and fulfils the government’s manifesto pledge to end low pay for those on the national living wage.
Eligibility for the national living wage will also be extended by reducing the age threshold to 21-year-olds for the first time. A 21-year-old will get a 12.4% increase, from £10.18 this year to £11.44 next year, worth almost £2,300 a year for a full-time worker.
National minimum wage rates for younger workers will also increase. 18-20-year-olds will get a wage boost to £8.60 per hour – a £1.11 hourly pay bump.
The Department for Business and Trade estimate 2.7 million workers will directly benefit from the 2024 national living wage increase.
The Treasury says this means the government has now achieved its target of lifting the “national living wage” to two-thirds of median earnings by 2024.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.26pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.42pm GMT 
Today’s Covid inquiry hearing is over. But Prof Sir Chris Whitty has not finished giving evidence, and he will be back at 9.30am tomorrow.
block-time published-time 4.33pm GMT 
Readers who will have been following earlier Covid inquiry hearings will be wondering why no juicy WhatsApp messages have been cropping up today. Whitty provided an answer, Eleanor Hayward from the Times reports.
“You have probably had the privilege of reading my rather dull - compared to other people’s - WhatsApps”, Whitty tells the inquiry
enltr“You have probably had the privilege of reading my rather dull - compared to other people's - WhatsApps”, Whitty tells the inquiry
— Eleanor Hayward (@eleanorhayward) November 21, 2023
block-time published-time 4.28pm GMT 
 Whitty says it was hard to get ministers to understand implications of exponential growth  
Back in the Covid inquiry, Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England and chief medical adviser for the government, said that one problem he had in early 2020 was getting ministers to understand how quickly Covid could spread. He said:
I think that one of the things that we really did not find easy to get across – and I found this surprising given that so many people in both politics and in the official system are trained in economics – is the extraordinary power of exponential growth to get you from small numbers to large numbers very quickly.
People just don’t get that … I think they got it a bit more now because of having seen it. But certainly prior to this pandemic, I think people just didn’t understand how quickly you move from ‘it’s actually very small numbers to it’s actually very large numbers and doubling every few days’.
block-time published-time 4.18pm GMT 
 Cameron takes swipe at Boris Johnson's 'allusions' in maiden Lords speech defending his own record as PM  
 David Cameron did not have anything very new or profound to say about foreign policy, or the CPTPP bill, in his maiden speech in the House of Lords. But it was an accomplished speech full of jokes, flattery, self-deprecation, self-aggrandisment and score-settling. Here are the highlights.
Cameron suggested that he would be willing to let himself by questioned by MPs.  He said:
I look forward to answering noble lords’ questions monthly and appear before all the relevant committees. I recognise my responsibilities to this house and I’m happy to consider other appropriate mechanisms so that parliament is able to scrutinise all the work of my department.
That seemed to be reference to suggestions he should take questions from MPs as foreign secretary in Westminster Hall.
He defended his record as prime minister. He said:
As prime minister, I learned that the respect we command overseas also depends on success at home. We certainly didn’t get everything right. But over six years, we did smash some of the big political orthodoxies, showing you can grow the economy and cut carbon emissions, you can cut the deficit and create jobs, you can achieve the best school results in the poorest areas.
And you can start to build a society that is multi-ethnic, multiracial and proud and patriotic.
And today with a British Indian prime minister at our helm, we have a good opportunity to do all of those things and ensure we stand taller in the world and stronger too.
Cameron did not mention the fact that the biggest political orthodoxy that he managed to smash when he was PM – the assumption the UK would remain in the EU – was one he wanted to keep intact. This passage was also interesting because it does not fit with the thrust of Rishi Sunak’s speech to the Conservative party conference, in which he complained of “30 years of a political system which incentivises the easy decision, not the right one” (including Cameron’s government, by implication).
He said he had always admired the House of Lords as a “patient, diligent and considered complement” to the Commons.  And he joked about the “ornate, carved, wooden panels” in the chamber, saying it was a significant upgrade compared with his “now infamous shepherd’s hut”.He compared himself to Margaret Thatcher, saying that in her maiden speech in the Lords she pointed out that she was responsible for giving peerages to so many of its members. He was in the same position, he said. He joked about being to blame “for putting space here at a premium”.He joked about the large number of Lib Dem peers (81), saying he always told Nick Clegg that his party “would feel the benefit of participating in the coalition for many years to come”.He claimed he first set foot in the Lords as parliamentary researcher, when he listened to Lord Macmillan making his maiden speech attacking Margaret Thatcher.  He said he would not be doing the same to his successor.He praised Rishi Sunak as a “strong and capable prime minister”. And he said that his experience as an ex-PM would help Sunak “in meeting the vital challenges that we face as a country”.He jokingly dismissed Boris Johnson’s chances of a comeback. By leading the leave campaign, Johnson did as much as anyone to end Cameron’s premiership. In a reference to his nemesis, Cameron said:
It was a surprise to be asked [to be foreign secretary]. I have not been sitting like some latter day de Gaulle at Colombey-les-Deux-Églises waiting to be asked to – how should I put it – to take back control. Nor am I Cincinnatus hovering over my plough. I leave all classical allusions, and indeed illusions for that matter, to another former prime minister with whom I shared a number of educational experiences.
When Johnson resigned, he compared himself to Cincinnatus, a Roman leader who was called out of retirement to rule again as a dictator. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.33pm GMT 
 Cameron delivers maiden speech as peer, saying he hopes to spend much longer in Lords than his 15 years in Commons  
In the House of Lords David Cameron is now delivering his maiden speech as a peer, opening the debate on the trade (comprehensive and progressive agreement for Trans-Pacific partnership) bill.
He was sitting on the frontbench for at least half an hour before he started, grinning broadly and clearly pleased as punch with his new role.
His speech (so far) is mostly about himself, and his comeback, but also full of flattering comments about the House of Lords. (Nothing about the CPTPP so far.) I will post a summary soon.
He started by saying that he was only in the Commons for 15 years, and that he looks forward to spending many more years as a member of the Lords.
(Clearly, he is not taking Labour’s threat to abolish the Lords too seriously.)
    David Cameron delivering his maiden speech in Lords Photograph: House of Lords    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.36pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.24pm GMT 
 Whitty under pressure as asked to explain why he did not do more to warn No 10 of Covid threat in February 2020  
Back at the Covid inquiry, Prof Sir Chris Whitty says the government could have “moved up a gear” in February 2020 when the first warnings came that a pandemic could lead to more than 100,000 or more deaths.
He says, if someone had warned that a terrorist attack might kill this number of people, the system would have reacted very differently.
Q: Why did you not pick up the phone to No 10, and tell them they were not understanding the magnitude of the threat?
 Whitty says there was a debate about exactly what the reasonable worst-case scenario was [ie, whether it was 300,000 deaths or 600,000 deaths.]
He says the system is not designed to understand threats of this kind [ie, health ones, not security ones].
Q: That was a systemic failure, wasn’t it?
 Whitty says it is not clear what difference it would have made if No 10 had responded with more alarm. But he goes on:
Under ideal circumstances there would have been a different response.
 Hugo Keith KC tries again.
Q: Given there was a system failure, why didn’t you and others aware of the nature of the threat email No 10, or “shout out your concern”?
 Whitty says it is difficult to know where you can go, once you have talked to all the people you have talked to.
He says Sir Patrick Vallance says in his written statement he tried to get No 10 interested via Dominic Cummings.
He says he is not convinced, if he had acted differently, the outcome would have been different. But he goes on:
Nobody looking at this could say this was ideal.
They have stopped for a break.
 Dame Heather Hallett, the chair, tells Whitty that he will have to return tomorrow, because they won’t get through all his evidence today.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.16pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.04pm GMT 
 Humza Yousaf tells Sunak UK should recognise state of Palestine  
In the Scottish parliament this afternoon MSPs are debating an SNP motion calling for a ceasefire in Gaza.
Ahead of the debate, Humza Yousaf, Scotland’s first minister, released an open letter to Rishi Sunak  saying the UK should recognise the state of Palestine. He said.
The UK needs to work with the international community to break, once and for all, the political impasse that has condemned Israelis and the Palestinians to successive cycles of violence. This would be assisted were the UK to recognise the state of Palestine within the 1967 borders, as over 130 members of the United Nations, including nine members of the European Union, have done and as the new Spanish government has pledged.
Recognition would offer hope to Palestinians that a just and durable political solution is possible. It would make it plain to the Israeli government that a military solution is illusory and the expulsion of Palestinians from Gaza is unacceptable.
Yousaf also made the same argument in an open letter to Keir Starmer.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.50pm GMT 
Back at the Covid inquiry, Prof Sir Chris Whitty says, looking back at the start of the crisis, he thinks it would have been good to consider asking people returning from China in early 2020 to self-isolate, regardless of symptoms.
But he says he is not sure what difference this would have made, because Covid was also getting into the UK from European countries.
block-time published-time 2.45pm GMT 
 Sunak rejects UN criticism of new law allowing severe sentences for climate activists who disrupt traffic  
Rishi Sunak has rejected a statement from a United Nations official saying lengthy sentences for climate protesters could curb freedoms in the UK, PA Media reports.
No 10 spoke out in response to Ian Fry, the UN’s special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of human rights in the context of climate change, raising concern at the sentences handed to Just Stop Oil campaigners who scaled the Dartford Crossing in October 2022.
Morgan Trowland, 40, and Marcus Decker, 34, were jailed for three years and two years and seven months respectively after using ropes and other climbing gear to scale the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge, causing gridlock across two days when police closed it to traffic.
Fry, in a letter to a UK government  representative sent in August, said the sentences were “significantly more severe than previous sentences imposed for this type of offending in the past”.
The special rapporteur said he was “particularly concerned” about the sentencing of the “environmental human rights defenders” in relation to their “rights to freedom of expression and freedom of peaceful assembly and association”.
He added: “I am gravely concerned about the potential flow-on effect that the severity of the sentences could have on civil society and the work of activists, expressing concerns about the triple planetary crisis and, in particular, the impacts of climate change on human rights and on future generations.”
But Sunak rejected Fry’s comments in a post on X.
In his post Sunak said:
Those who break the law should feel the full force of it. It’s entirely right that selfish protesters intent on causing misery to the hard-working majority face tough sentences. It’s what the public expects and it’s what we’ve delivered.
enltrThose who break the law should feel the full force of it. It's entirely right that selfish protestors intent on causing misery to the hard-working majority face tough sentences. It's what the public expects and it's what we've delivered. https://t.co/lHtxkqsgqM
 — Rishi Sunak (@RishiSunak) November 21, 2023
As PA reports, last month Trowland and Decker were denied the chance to challenge their sentences at the supreme court. PA says:
In July the protesters lost an appeal over what their lawyers said was the “extraordinary length” of their jail terms for the direct action on the crossing over the River Thames in south-east England.
In their ruling, the judges acknowledged the “long and honourable tradition of civil disobedience on conscientious grounds” and that the sentences handed to Trowland and Decker went “well beyond previous sentences imposed for this type of offending”.
But the lady chief justice, Lady Carr, said the jail terms were “not excessive” and reflected “parliament’s will” under new laws enacted under the Police, Crime, Sentencing and Courts Act last year.
The legislation introduced a new “fault-based public nuisance offence for what obviously will include non-violent protest behaviour, with a maximum sentence of 10 years’ imprisonment”, the appeal judges said.
Carr said the sentences met the “legitimate” aim of deterring others from such offending.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.59pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.33pm GMT 
Back at the Covid inquiry Hugo Keith KC, counsel for the inquiry, is asking Prof Sir Chris Whitty about an email he sent to No 10 on 28 January 2020 warning about the risk of a pandemic.
    Email from Whitty to No 10. Photograph: Covid inquiry   
 Whitty says he was concerned at the time that government might opt for a “middle way” solution.
He says he wrote this to make the point that that would not be an option. He wanted ministers to know that, if Covid was not contained in China, there would be a pandemic.
And he says he wanted them to know that, once there were in a pandemic situation, stopping the virus would not be possible. It could be delayed, but not stopped.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.47pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.27pm GMT 
The UK and South Korea are to launch talks on a new trade deal  and sign a diplomatic accord as part of the state visit by Korea’s president, Yoon Suk Yeol,, PA Media reports. PA says:
The business and trade secretary, Kemi Badenoch, will begin negotiations with her Korean counterpart, Bang Moon-kyu, at the UK-Korea Business Forum at Mansion House on Wednesday.
They will also announce £21bn of investments committed by Korean businesses in green energy and infrastructure projects across the UK.
The UK secured a free trade deal with South Korea in 2019, with the agreement largely aimed at keeping trade flowing post-Brexit and removing uncertainty.
The UK hopes to secure modern digital provisions in a new deal because most of its services exports to Korea are delivered digitally.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.51pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.17pm GMT 
 Whitty says he thinks, even if a proper plan for Covid had been in place, that might not have helped.
That is because it would “almost certainly have been the wrong plan, and could even the even have slowed us down”.
He says, in a crisis like this, governments need to adapt. 
What matters is having the right building blocks available, he says. 
block-time published-time 2.11pm GMT 
 Whitty says, in a pandemic, capability counts for more than the plan. “Capability trumps plans every single time,” he says.
block-time published-time 2.10pm GMT 
The Covid inquiry is back. 
 Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England and chief medical adviser for the UK, says his view in early 2020 was that the government’s flu pandemic plan was not going to be of much use.
That was partly because Covid was not the same as flu, and partly because the plan was not adequate for the needs of a 1918-style flu pandemic either.
block-time published-time 1.58pm GMT 
Turning away from the Covid inquiry for a moment, Tory feuding is continuing today. Damian Green, the former first secretary of state who leads the Conservative One Nation Caucus, warned at the weekend that the party would be in trouble  if it were captured by the right. He posted a link to an article about his comment on X.
enltrLeaning too far right puts off voters, Tory centrists say https://t.co/y6mcUCOkv4
 — Damian Green MP (@DamianGreen) November 20, 2023
In response Dame Andrea Jenkyns, the rightwinger who is calling for a vote of no confidence in Rishi Sunak, has given an interview to GB News in which she says people like Green should “sod off to the Lib Dems”. She said:
This One Nation Group make up the majority of the parliamentary party but these are the ones who didn’t want Brexit, who didn’t want Boris, who didn’t want Liz Truss, so they’re not really in tune with the British public. Isn’t Damian Green the one who got deselected  by his own association back in February?
I don’t think the Tory party are going far enough [to the right] actually …
I want to stop net zero, I want strong borders, I want strong policing like the 80s where they used to drag protesters off the streets.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.18pm GMT 
You don’t have to be a cabinet minister or a top civil servant to give evidence to the Covid inquiry. The inquiry has asked me to point out that it is actively encouraging members of the public to submit evidence of their own experience of the pandemic, through its Every Story Matters programme.  Do click on the link for details. What people will say be read and analysed, and the points made will be considered by the inquiry as it mulls over its conclusions. Anonymised versions of the evidence will also be archived.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.40pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.09pm GMT 
 Whitty does not accept he was wrong not to take Jonathan Van-Tam's warnings about Covid on 16 January 2020 more seriously  
Q: On 14 January 2020 you were alerted to a report about human to human transmission of coronavirus.
 Whitty says, by that point, they realised person to person transmission was happening in some settings. But that does not mean a pandemic was inevitable, he says.
Q: The trigger for government action had been met.
 Whitty says that was the trigger for government taking it seriously. He says Sage met about a week later.
In any week, he says he gets dozens of alerts about outbreaks. He says he has a system of triggers indicating which ones need to be taken seriously.
Q: By 16 January you knew there was a coronavirus with a 12% hospitalisation rate, and human to human transmission. Shouldn’t you have been taking it more seriously?
 Whitty says at this point they had only known about this for two weeks.
Q: Prof Jonathan Van-Tam, your deputy, says in his witness statement he thought at that point this would lead to a pandemic. He said he was seriously concerned. He said he went to you, and he said you argued it might escalate, but that for now you should wait and monitor the situation.
 Whitty says Van-Tam is quite “instinctive” in his decisions. He says if he had asked him what evidence he had there was going to be a pandemic, he would just have said it was instinct.
So Jonathan, and I think he would agree with this, is quite instinctive in some of these decisions – very often, rightly.
He is a very able epidemiologist and thinker in this area, but if I had said to him, ‘OK, what is the evidence on which this is going to be a pandemic …?’ he would have said ‘it just feels like that to me’.
That is quite a narrow basis on which to make quite big decisions.
He says it is not clear to him that, if he had acted differently on 16 January, there would have been a better outcome in the end.
Q: Was Van-Tam’s instinct right, and yours wrong?
 Whitty does not accept that. He says government was already taking the issue seriously. He says he cannot see how the outcome would have been different if they had responded differently then.
He says, if the result of this inquiry is to set up a “hair trigger” response to threats like this, that would not be an advance.
Government was already engaged, he says. He says “wait and see” does not mean it was just him and Van-Tam having a chat. Scientists were monitoring the data, he says.
He says he can look back on moment in the Covid crisis where, if a different decision had been taken at an inflection point, the outcome might have been different. But he says he does not see 16 January as one of these moments.
He says, if you go to government just on the basis of gut feeling, without data, you do not get much response.
He says “waiting and seeing” only meant a few days.
He says acting early may always seem like the right thing to do. But he says that does not take into account the cases where deciding to do nothing turns out to be right.
They have now paused for lunch.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.04pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.39pm GMT 
 Whitty accepts decision-making 'chaotic' in No 10 under Johnson - but claims other countries had similar problems  
Q: How efficient was the administrative system around the PM?
 Whitty says the civil servants did a good job in very difficult circumstances. The political system was more mixed, he says. It was “quite often chaotic”, he says. But he says he thinks it was probably chaotic in other governments.
He says civil servants should not say who their fantasy PM would be. They should operate with the person who is there.
Q: There is clear evidence that the PM had difficulty taking decisions. Did you see that?
 Whitty says the way Johnson took decisions was “unique to him”.
Q: That’s a euphemism. What do you mean?
 Whitty says he does not want to make a commentary on politicians.
Q: It must have been apparent to you that the government had trouble taking decisions and sticking to them. This “degree of oscillation and chaos is apparent”.
That’s correct, says Whitty.
But he says “it’s a matter of record that many other nations had similar problems”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.32pm GMT 
Q: Did ministers every cherrypick scientific advice?
Yes, says Whitty. He says that was inevitable.
But he says that did not apply to the principal decision-makers in government: Boris Johnson, Matt Hancock, Rishi Sunak and Michael Gove.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.22pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.31pm GMT 
 Whitty says the CMOs were able to request that alert levels were changed. He says they knew ministers were unlikely to reject the recommendations.
And he says he also offered public health advice directly to the public as CMO.
Q: Were ministers clear that it was for them, as elected representatives, to take these decisions?
 Whitty says, in the early stages, some of them needed help to see this was their role. They saw it as a technocratic exercise. Whitty says he saw this as a political exercise.
There was no pushback on this, he says.
Q: Were there ever any good or easy options?
 Whitty says all the options were bad. Some were very bad.
And any option would last for a long time. This took some time for some people to internalise.
And people were going to die whatever happened, he says.
Q: So the mantra that government was following the science was a bad one?
 Whitty says at first and Vallance welcomed this claim, because it meant ministers were listening to scientists.
But he says they came to the view that it was a bad description of the process because it blurred the dividing line between scientific advice and political decision-making.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.26pm GMT 
Q: Did you hold yourself back from giving advice on what you thought government should do? Did you only give advice on public health implications?
 Whitty says he and Patrick Vallance were blunt about public health advice. But they never told the government what it had to do, because those were political decisions.
block-time published-time 12.23pm GMT 
 Whitty says he would like to see scientists advising government offered protection from legal action  
 Keith says he does not want to cover the disgraceful abuse directed at Sage scientists. But he asks if Whitty was concerned that scientists advising goverment might be open to some legal action.
 Whitty says he is concerned about this. He says the legal position is not clear, because the advisers are not government employees. He says he would like to ensure that they get protection from legal claims. That should be “solvable”, he says.
block-time published-time 12.16pm GMT 
Back at the hearing Hugo Keith KC, counsel for the inquiry, is getting to the point in early/mid-March 2020 when No 10 realised a new approach was needed.
 Whitty accepts this was in response to the data changing. He says, in situations like this, data trumps modelling.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.12pm GMT 
 Vallance says Sunak was wrong to suggest Sage did not realise Treasury official listening to its meetings  
Turning away from the hearing for a moment, Chris Smyth from the Times has found a passage in Sir Patrick Vallance ’s lengthy witness statement (published by the inquiry last night) in which he seems to contradict something said by Rishi Sunak.
In an interview with the Spectator  last summer Sunak claimed that Sage members did not realise the Treasury had an official listening to their meetings. The interview took place during the Tory leadership contest and the interview was about Sunak’s scepticism about lockdown measures (also opposed by the Spectator).
Vallance, the Sage co-chair at the time, says the Treasury official attended Sage meetings because he actively encouraged it.
enltrPatrick Vallance suggestions Rishi Sunak was misleading in his Tory leadership claims about SAGE pic.twitter.com/8rWc5iX0RJ
 — Chris Smyth (@Smyth_Chris) November 21, 2023
In his evidence yesterday Vallance also cast doubt  on Sunak’s claim not to be aware of scientists’ concerns about his “eat out to help out” scheme.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.01pm GMT 
 Keith asks if it was realistic to expect Whitty and Patrick Vallance to relay to ministers the full extent of what experts were saying in Sage meetings.
 Whitty says writing up the whole meeting would have taken too long.
But he says, because he and Vallance were both summarising what was said, that provided “some degree of error prevention” because, if one of them missed something out, the other could correct.
block-time published-time 11.56am GMT 
The hearing has resumed.
 Whitty said that when Dominic Cummings was allowed to listen to Sage meetings, that caused a row. But Whitty said he personally thought this was a sensible arrangement.
UPDATE: Whitty said:
I thought it was perfectly sensible that if one of the most senior advisers to the prime minister, if she or he wished to, could listen in on Sage, struck me as a sensible thing to do … they could ask questions potentially, but try to bias the answer that was given and that would be extremely unacceptable, but that wasn’t the situation, in my view, that happened.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.51am GMT 
 Whitty says Sage could have considered lockdown earlier - but also suggests proposing such radical policy job for ministers  
The key charge against Prof Sir Chris Whitty, and Sage (the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies – the expert body he co-chaired) is that they should have considered the case for a lockdown much earlier than they did, and put that proposal to government. Hugo Keith KC put this argument to Whitty in the final minutes before the break. Whitty’s response was nuanced.
Whitty said it was “reasonable” to argue that Sage should have considered the case for a full lockdown earlier.  When Keith first put his question, Whitty said that although restrictions had been imposed in the past in previous pandemics, full lockdowns had not been used. He went on:
The idea of essentially, by law, locking down all society is not something which had previously been used. You could argue, and I think it is reasonable to argue, that that is something we should have cottoned on to an earlier stage.
In reality, my view is that the band of situations where that would be relevant is in fact relatively narrow.
But Whitty also suggested that it was for government, not scientists, to propose such a radical intervention.  He accepted that Sage had not considered the case for a lockdown in early and mid-February.
Did Sage look in detail at a mandatory lockdown … in early and mid-February? I think the short answer is no. That’s pretty clear from the minutes. We did, on the other hand, look at ways of keeping households separated.
Whitty said China had provided an example of a full lockdown approach. He went on:
You can argue that we should have gone for a maximalist model. I don’t want to put anyone into a difficult position, but were we to have been instructed by ministers, ‘what would happen if we did a Chinese approach?’, that would be something that Sage would undoubtedly have looked at.
The question actually, I think, is would it have been appropriate for a group of scientists to come up with what I consider is quite a radical proposition to put to government? I think that’s a debatable question.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.28am GMT 
Q: In your witness statement you talk about Sage having a “failure of imagination” at the very start. What did you mean by that?
 Whitty says he wanted Sage to consider the experience of other pandemics. He was aware of the danger of a second wave in winter. That is what happened in previous flu pandemics in the 20th century. That is something that was not in the modelling, but had happened in the past.
And he says, in the past, a lot of other NPIs (non-pharmaceutical interventions) had been used, such as self-isolation, quarantine and closing schools.
But full lockdowns had not been used, he says.
He says it is reasonable to argue that Sage should have considered them.
Q: So if there was a failure to think about the prospect of a “mandatory stay-at-home order” being an option, if Sage had thought it was an option, would the government have considered it?
 Whitty says, by the middle of March, Sage was saying the government would have to significantly reduce interactions by households. Whether or not to do that by law was a political decision.
He says this approach had been used in China.
Q: Should Sage have proposed a lockdown as an option?
 Whitty says China “had thrown the kitchen sink at this”. He says his view was that the UK needed to find a way of cutting interactions.
He says you could argue that Sage should have gone for a “maximalist model”. He says if ministers had proposed that, they would have had a look at it.
But he says it is “debatable” whether Sage should have taken the initiative, he says.
And they are now stopping for a break.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.19am GMT 
 Whitty says Sage was not the only route by which scientific advice was provided to government. It is important to stress that, he says. He says the government had many other sources of advice.
block-time published-time 11.08am GMT 
Q: In your witness statement, you says as co-chair of Sage you are likely to be biased in its favour. Were you aware of how other countries get scientific advice?
 Whitty says he was well aware of how other countries do this. 
In general, the UK system of integration of science into government is still short of where it should be, by “quite some distance”, but it is better than in some other countries, he says.
The Sage system “had some pluses and minuses”.
But he could not see another system that made him think “if only we had that, we would be in a much better shape”.
Q: There is a tension between having a body small enough to take decisions, but large enough to represent a wide range of views.
 Whitty says, at first, it was too Sage. Patrick Vallance recognised that and responded. Arguable it later got too large, Whitty says.
He says it is important to stress Sage is not a fixed body. People come on to it and go off it, depending on what the problem is.
block-time published-time 11.04am GMT 
 Whitty says the countries that could scale up testing quickly, like South Korea, had invested in that capacity. He says South Korea had had a bad experience with Mers.
For a country like the UK, it was much harder, he says.
Q: Were you consulted on the decision to disband Public Health England?
 Whitty says he was just told this was happening. He thought PHE had acted professionally. 
block-time published-time 11.00am GMT 
 Whitty says the CMOs for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland sometimes gave collective advice when they wanted to give a collective view on something important.
Q: Were there any significant scientific disagreements between you?
Not that he can recall, says Whitty.
But he says they sometimes had to think about things quite hard. Sometimes they were 49%/51% calls.
The most difficult decisions were about borders, he says.
Q: There have been claims there was not proper collaboration between the four nations.
 Whitty says the CMOs, and the public agencies, did a lot together. And the presidents of the medical colleges worked together.
But, he says, that does not mean that at an operational and political level there weren’t differences.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.51am GMT 
 Keith asks Whitty about a comment he gave in a speech on 12 February 2020. He shows it to the inquiry.
    Extract from speech given by Whitty in early 2020 Photograph: Covid inquiry   
 Whitty defends what he was saying.
 Keith says Whitty was talking about the risk of spending money on something that might not happen. He suggests that would be overreaction.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.00am GMT
block-time published-time 10.48am GMT 
 Whitty says the precautionary principle is often misunderstood.
Where there are no downsides, the precautionary principle justifies acting; for example, telling people to wash their hands.
But that does not apply in cases where acting does have downsides, he says.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.46am GMT 
 Whitty says he does not accept that he warned against over-reacting at start of Covid inquiry  
 Whitty says doctors have to give advice on both sides of equation. If a patient needs an operation, even if a doctor thinks it is worthwhile, they have to give advice about the potential downsides, he says.
He suggests this influenced his thinking on advice about lockdown measures.
Q: To what extent did the need for data impact on your advice early on?
 Whitty says, by the time Sage was giving advice, he was supporting the Sage advice.
From 16 March onwards, Sage was very clear about the need for action.
But, when you give advice, it is also important to acknowledge the downsides too, he says.
Q: There is a difference between accepting the downsides, and saying you should not overreact. Did you warn against overreacting?
 Whitty says he was not deviating from the position of Sage.
The view of Sage was that, to avoid deaths, action was necessary.
But it was also clear that downsides would be involved.
He says ministers needed to know that. If they were not aware, there was a risk of them reversing course.
He says this approach was appropriate. Any doctor or civil servant would accept this was the correct thing to do.
Q: Did Sage itself warn against the dangers of overreacting from early January to early March?
 Whitty says he does not think Sage would have used the phrase overreaction. It was about emphasising the downsides.
Q: The documentary evidence seems to suggest you were prominent in warning of the risk of overreacting. Is that fair?
 Whitty says he rejects Keith’s characterisation of this as “overreaction” because that implies he thought the reaction should not happen. His concern was to make sure the downsides were understood.
I’ve rejected and I will continue to reject your characterisation of this as ‘overreaction’, because that implies that I thought that in a sense the action should not happen.
What I thought should happen is that people should be aware that without action very serious things would occur but the downsides of those actions should be made transparent.
I don’t consider that incorrect.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.13am GMT
block-time published-time 10.36am GMT 
 Whitty says he was wary of introducing Covid interventions too early because he knew poor people would lose out most  
Q: Were you co-chair of Sage, or was Sir Patrick Vallance the lead chair?
 Whitty says he and Vallance agreed that it was best to have a permanent chair. So Vallance chaired the meetings when he was there. But technically they were co-chairs.
Q: Did you try to form a common position on advice from Sage, and on technical advice to government?
Yes, says Whitty. 
He says in one respect he was a member of Sage. He gave opinions in his own capacity.
But, once Sage had agreed a position, he saw it as his role to express the Sage position – not his own, personal view. Vallance also expressed the collective Sage view.
Q: Was it hard to ensure you were always singing from the same hymnsheet?
 Whitty says the Sage process helped establish a common position. Where Sage did not consider a matter, he and Vallance tried to agree a common view before they advised the government.
Q: Was there a tension between you and Vallance? Jeremy Farrar said this in his book.
 Whitty says Farrar, who is a colleague and a friend, had a book to sell. He says the differences between him and Vallance were small.
Q: Farrar in his book, and Vallance in his diary, say you were more cautious, and more inclined to wait until moving to measures.
 Whitty says they should be “very careful of the narcissism of small differences”. The differences were very small.
But he was very clear that the impacts of measures such as cocooning (a precursor to lockdown) would be highest in areas of deprivation.
He says, with the benefit of hindsight, he thinks they went “a bit too late” in terms of introducing measures in the first wave.
He says he was probably further in the “let’s think through the disadvantages” camp as the impact of interventions was being considered.
UPDATE: Whitty said:
Well Sir Jeremy, who is a good friend and colleague, had a book to sell, and that made it more exciting, I’m told.
My own view was that actually the differences were extremely small
And the main one – and Sir Patrick, I thought put it very well – was that I saw as part of my role within Sage, in my first role as an individual, to reflect some of the very significant problems for particularly areas of deprivation, I saw for many years the actions that we were taking in terms of what was going to be advised to ministers to consider for what they did next.
And that I think that was an appropriate thing for me to do and Sir Patrick also thought it was appropriate.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.04am GMT
block-time published-time 10.26am GMT 
Q: Did the system of international collaboration work well?
 Whitty says, in the circumstances, it worked as well as could be expected.
Q: Can you give examples?
 Whitty says, for every new wave of Covid, the first information came from the countries involved.
And he says, with the original Wuhan wave, they at first relied on Chinese science.
There were many groups. But they all involved sharing information.
When the UK had the Alpha wave (called the Kent variant at the time), it was the UK sharing its information with other countries.
block-time published-time 10.21am GMT 
Q: Was there no aspect on the pandemic on which you did not advise?
 Whitty says he would not put it like that. He says he felt it important to advise on issues where advice from a scientist or doctor would be useful.
He says there was a limit to what they could do. There were only 20 people in his office, he said.
Q: But there were no issues on which you could not advise?
 Whitty says quite often his office said they thought it was not right for them to advise on a particular matter.
block-time published-time 10.18am GMT 
 Whitty says, as CMO (chief medical officer) for England, he matches what the CMOs do in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. But he says he also advises the government on health on UK matters, and as CMO for England he has certain international responsibilities.
He says, when Covid first emerged in January, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam led on the response. He was one of three deputy chief medical officers, and his responsibility was health protection. But, by the end of January, Whitty says he was leading on this issue
    Chris Whitty Photograph: Covid inquiry      
block-time published-time 10.13am GMT 
 Keith is asking about the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), which is headed by Whitty.
Q: Did your ability to be CMO as well as CEO of NIHR help?
 Whitty says overall this was beneficial. He was able to combine the strategy for medical research with strategy for Covid. But he says doing both roles meant he was “quite stretched”.
block-time published-time 10.09am GMT 
 Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England and chief medical adviser for the UK, is giving evidence now.
 Hugo Keith KC, lead counsel for the inquiry, is asking the questions.
 Dame Heather Hallett, the chair, points out that Whitty has already given evidence. Here is a report of his evidence in module one, which looked at pandemic preparedness.
 Related:  Chris Whitty: UK should have focused more on stopping Covid-type pandemic
 Keith starts by saying that, for module two, looking at how the government responded to the pandemic, Whitty has produced a corporate witness statement and a fourth personal one. These run to 340 pages, he says. He says Whitty has also given the inquiry hundreds of documents.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.14am GMT
block-time published-time 10.02am GMT 
 UK borrows less than expected this year as Hunt lines up giveaways  
The UK government borrowed less than expected in the first seven months of the financial year as Jeremy Hunt  puts the last-minute touches to a series of pre-election giveaways in his autumn statement tomorrow, Phillip Inman reports.
 Related:  UK borrows less than expected this year as Hunt lines up giveaways
block-time published-time 9.54am GMT 
If you are one of those Conservative MPs who believe that the secret to electoral success is tax cuts (are there any Tory MPs who don’t?), then the splash headlines in this morning’s papers will be very welcome. Here are three of them from rightwing papers.
enltrTELEGRAPH: Sunak pins hopes on ‘Thatcher’ tax package #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/GeqhrhlEEi
 — Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) November 20, 2023
enltrEXPRESS: PM: We can and will cut taxes #TomorrowsPapersToday pic.twitter.com/XCZ5MbgsRO
 — Neil Henderson (@hendopolis) November 20, 2023
enltr???? Return Of Tax Cutting Tories ?PM says it's time to reward hard work in tomorrow's Autumn Statement - and there could be even MORE giveaways in the spring ? @JasonGroves1 ? https://t.co/4iKGap9dUp  ???? #frontpagestoday #UK @DailyMailUK pic.twitter.com/JyfVAgtTVv
 — ?????????? ?????????? ?????????? ?? (@ukpapers) November 21, 2023
 Laura Trott, the new chief secretary to the Treasury, was giving interviews this morning and she confirmed the papers were right to anticipate tax cuts. She told Times Radio:
We have turned a corner. Inflation has halved. That is really significant for people at home. We know how tough things have been.
Real wages are, for three months, now ahead of inflation – again, that’s really important to kind of making a difference to how people feel.
So we can now talk about tax cuts and focus on growth, and that is what we’re going to be doing.
block-time published-time 9.41am GMT 
 Patrick Vallance says he considered resigning during Covid because of threats to his family  
In one of his witness statements published last night, Sir Patrick Vallance also said that he had considered resigning during Covid because of threats he was facing. As the BBC reports , Vallance said:
Like many others I received abuse and threats and I was concerned for the wellbeing and safety of my family.
At times those factors did lead me to question whether I should continue.
I also found people breaking the lockdown rules very difficult and considered what I should do in response, but decided that I would help most by continuing with my job.
block-time published-time 9.40am GMT 
     Prof Sir Chris Whitty arriving at the Covid inquiry this morning. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA      
block-time published-time 9.39am GMT 
 Government accused of economic blackmail after omitting Northern Ireland from latest levelling up funding  
The government has been accused of “economic blackmail” after omitting Northern Ireland from levelling up funding because of its political vacuum. 
Michael Gove’s Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said yesterday the region would not receive anything from the latest allocation, which will fund 55 projects in England, Wales and Scotland. “Given the current absence of a working executive and assembly, the government is not proceeding with this round of the levelling up fund at this time,” it said.
Stormont collapsed in February 2022 when the Democratic Unionist party (DUP) walked out to protest post-Brexit trading arrangements that treat Northern Ireland differently from the rest of the UK.
 Sammy Wilson, a DUP MP, said the funding cut was an “outrageous” attempt to blackmail the party into reviving power-sharing. He also accused the government of siphoning money to Conservative-held seats in England.
 Conor Murphy, a Sinn Féin assembly member, said the decision was a “cynical attack on ordinary people” and that Northern Ireland was paying the price for the DUP’s “reckless boycott”.
 Claire Hanna, an SDLP MP, said: “The Conservative government don’t ever need an excuse to under-invest in our region but the DUP have given them that cover on this particular fund.”
Northern Ireland received allocations in two previous rounds and was led to expect another allocation - the department placed advertisements in local media that used images of Belfast with the declaration “Levelling Up is here”.
block-time published-time 9.21am GMT 
 Chris Whitty expected to say he regrets saying people would not tolerate long lockdown in Covid inquiry  
Good morning. Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, and chief medical adviser for the UK, is giving evidence all day to the Covid inquiry. The session starts at 10am, but we have already had an insight into one of the points he might make from a witness statement  from Sir Patrick Vallance published by the inquiry last night. In it, Vallance says Whitty regrets saying “fatigue” might stop people putting up with a long lockdown.
    Extract from Patrick Vallance’s witness statement Photograph: Covid inquiry   
This was in one of three witness statements  from Vallance published by the inquiry last night, after the government’s former chief scientific adviser finished giving evidence in person.
In his evidence Vallance said Whitty had initially been more reluctant than others  to support an early lockdown at the start of the Covid crisis. This wasn’t a great secret because in those very early press conferences Whitty argued that, if the government were to introduce restrictions on what people could to too early, there was a danger that people would get tired of complying, and start reverting to normal behaviour, at a point where Covid was still a threat. This is what Vallance is referring to when he talks about Whitty introducing the concept of “behavioural fatigue”.
This later became highly controversial not just because it was wrong – people were willing to comply with lockdown restrictions for a long time (perhaps surprisingly) – but also because there does not seem to be much evidence to support the concept in the first place. Scientists on SPI-B (the Scientific Paendemic Insights group on Behaviour) subsequently said the idea did not come from them.
Here is the agenda for the day.
10am: Prof Sir Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, and chief medical adviser for the UK, gives evidence to the Covid inquiry.
10.15am: Andrew Bailey, governor of the Bank of England, gives evidence to the Commons Treasury committee about the Bank’s monetary policy reports.
11.30am: No 10 holds a lobby briefing
After 3pm: David Cameron is due to speak in the Lords for the first time as foreign secretary in a debate on the trade (comprehensive and progressive agreement for Trans-Pacific partnership) bill.
If you want to contact me, do try the “send us a message” feature. You’ll see it just below the byline – on the left of the screen, if you are reading on a laptop or a desktop. This is for people who want to message me directly. I find it very useful when people message to point out errors (even typos – no mistake is too small to correct). Often I find your questions very interesting, too. I can’t promise to reply to them all, but I will try to reply to as many as I can, either in the comments below the line; privately (if you leave an email address and that seems more appropriate); or in the main blog, if I think it is a topic of wide interest.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.42am GMT

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




Israel has long wanted Palestinians out of Gaza – my father saw it firsthand
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: OPINION; Version:2
Length: 1115 words
Byline: Raja Shehadeh
Highlight: Decades after the 1967 war, Israel is still under the illusion that violence against the Palestinians will give it peace and security
Body


Fifty-six years ago, after Israel’s victory in the six-day war in 1967, an intensive debate took place in the country regarding the future of the newly occupied West Bank and Gaza. The options ranged from outright annexation of the land by Israel, returning the West Bank to Jordan or the establishment of a Palestinian state.
My father, Aziz Shehadeh, was a proponent of the last. As a lawyer and activist for refugee rights, he proposed a Palestinian state living side by side with Israel. Washington urged Israel then to translate its undefined position for a settlement into concrete terms.
In the midst of Israel’s brutal attack on Gaza, the US is again urging Israel to come up with a plan for the day after. However, as in 1967, Israel’s driving ambitions now focus on retaining as much of the land as possible and getting rid of as many Palestinians as possible.
In 1967, Israeli policymakers were adamant about keeping the occupied Gaza Strip. As early as 8 June 1967, Golda Meir, the then secretary general of ruling party Mapai, stated in a meeting of the party’s political committee that she was for “getting rid of its Arabs”. The Israeli cabinet resolution 563, of 19 June 1967, determined that “according to the international border, the Gaza Strip is located within the territory of the state of Israel”. Yet because of the large Palestinian population in Gaza, annexation of the territory, as had happened in East Jerusalem , was not a viable option.
Mass expulsion of Palestinians from Gaza was also not feasible while the world was watching. So other strategies were employed. The first of these was to make life unbearable, by ruling with an iron fist and keeping the standard of living very low. The second was by encouraging emigration. Personally supervised by the prime minister, Levi Eshkol, this strategy relied on financial incentives. By mid-1968, tens of thousands had left the Strip , mostly for Jordan. But Jordan decided to stop admitting them, so Israel increased its attempts to boost emigration of Palestinians to non-Arab countries such as Brazil and other South American states, as well as Canada and Australia, but with little success. In the end, none of these strategies brought about significant results, leading Eshkol to lament , “I still don’t know how to get rid of them.”
After the passage of more than five decades, and even with the imposition of a 16-year siege  of the Strip, it is clear that none of these strategies have worked and most of the Palestinian population of Gaza, composed mainly of refugees from 1948 when Israel was established, remained there and increased from 400,000 to 2.2 million. Now, with the war on Gaza, Israel seems to be seizing the opportunity to carry out what has not been possible in all the previous years.
In the wake of the 7 October killings, Israel launched a massive strike against Hamas, ostensibly to destroy its military strength, backed by sympathetic public support. But as my colleague, the human rights activist Raji Sourani, who lives in Gaza City, told me over the phone a few days ago, the war he is experiencing is not against Hamas; instead, bombs are striking locations that are heavily populated by civilians. 
Events point to Israel’s strategy of emptying the north of Gaza of its Palestinian population, with both the massive bombardment that has damaged at least 222,000 residential units , and the refusal to accept a ceasefire so essential life-saving provisions cannot enter. All this shows the massive pressure on the Palestinian population to move south, thus ethnically cleansing the north. There is little prospect that this strategy is intended to keep the civilians out of harm’s way, as Israel has announced, or that it will be reversed after hostilities end. When the fighting stops there would be few buildings in the north still standing for people to move back into to restore their homes and livelihoods.
Today, almost six decades after my father’s failed effort to convince the Israeli government to make peace with the Palestinians based on sharing the land, I feel the dreadful consequences of this failure. The killing of 11,000 people  by Israeli forces, the attacks taking place in the West Bank by both the Israeli army and Jewish settlers that have led to the deaths of 200 Palestinians , and the failure of the world to deter Israel’s excesses has ushered profound fear into my own life.
The cries of the man with dual Irish-Palestinian nationality who lived in Gaza’s Beach camp on the shore of the Mediterranean still ring in my ears. He said to an Al Jazeera reporter that his camp was being bombed from all sides by Israel, and he wondered whether he would survive. He was in darkness with only a torch lighting his face. He asked how much more suffering we must endure before the world stops this, then most poignantly asked the viewers: “Are you enjoying this?” I wonder whether he survived the Israeli bombings. Or another man who, after informing the reporter, “They’re bombing the camp continuously,” said, “We’re leaving our home. We’re moving to al-Shifa hospital.” He ended with the plea: “Do something. Do something.” I thought of him as the hospital was surrounded  by the Israeli army.
Everything that gave me hope that when violence reaches an unconscionable point and excessive violations of human rights are committed, Israel will be made to stop, is shattered now. I used to have faith that we would be protected by international humanitarian law, or by an outcry from the Israeli public against the excesses of their government – yet at this point I see no hope in either. Nor does it seem that there is hope that Israel will wake up from the delusion that war and violence against the Palestinians and its unassailable military strength will give it peace and security. This leaves us Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories vulnerable and with serious danger for our lives and our future presence in this land.
And yet, despite it all, I find myself echoing Raji Sourani, a friend with whom I have gone through a lot over the past decades. Last week he wrote  in Jacobin magazine: “We deserve justice and we deserve freedom. We believe we are on the right side of history and that we are the stones of the valley. Despite the immensity of the challenges we face, people here do not give up.”
                                                               Raja Shehadeh is a Palestinian lawyer and writer, and founder of the human rights organisation Al-Haq. His latest book, We Could Have Been Friends, My Father and I: A Palestinian Memoir, is a finalist for the National Book Award                                                         

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




‘It’s part of our psyche’: why Ireland sides with ‘underdog’ Palestine
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 10:27 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:7
Length: 1063 words
Byline: Rory Carroll and Lisa O'Carroll
Highlight: Ireland is seen as an outlier in the EU – but its sympathy for the suffering in Gaza is rooted in its own history
Body


The video clips have pinged around the world on social media eliciting applause, anger and a puzzled question: why are Irish politicians so outspoken  about Israel’s bombardment of Gaza?
The taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, described the assault as “approaching revenge”, the foreign minister, Micheál Martin, called it “disproportionate” and opposition politicians went much further in calling it mass murder. Some wore the keffiyeh in parliament.
Pro-Palestinian commentators have hailed the statements as an example to the rest of Europe on how to denounce an offensive  that has reportedly killed more than 11,000 people.
Pro-Israelis have called Ireland’s responses blinkered and a negation of Israel’s right to defend itself after Hamas killed more than 1,200 people and kidnapped more than 240 in southern Israel on 7 October.
Israel’s heritage minister, Amichai Eliyahu, urged Palestinians to “go to Ireland or the desert”. Israel’s government disowned his suggestion, but the outburst underscored a perception that Ireland is an outlier in the European Union. 
There have been pro-Palestinian marches across Ireland  and opposition parties have tried – but failed – to compel the government to refer Israel to the international criminal court and expel Israel’s ambassador, Dana Erlich. More than 600 academics signed a letter urging universities to sever institutional links with Israeli institutions.
“Irish people are passionate about Palestine, they really understand what’s happening,” Jilan Wahba Abdalmajid, the Palestinian ambassador to Ireland, said in an interview at her mission’s office in Dublin. “I’m privileged to be here.”
She lauded the government’s campaign for a ceasefire and said she had been honoured by a rapturous ovation at a Sinn Féin  party conference, where delegates chanted “free Palestine”. Palestinians were sharing clips of Irish legislators backing their cause, said Abdalmajid. “They see the support.”
Sympathy for Palestinians is rooted in Ireland’s history, said Niall Holohan, a retired diplomat who was based in Ramallah from 2002-2006 as the Irish government’s representative to the Palestinian Authority. “We feel we have been victimised over the centuries. It’s part of our psyche – underneath it all we side with the underdog.”
Jane Ohlmeyer, a Trinity College Dublin history professor and the author of Making Empire: Ireland, Imperialism, and the Early Modern World , said Ireland had been Britain’s oldest colony and a template for Palestine. “This has undoubtedly shaped how people from Ireland engage with postcolonial conflicts.”
Even before the latest conflict, parts of Northern Ireland were using proxy tribal identifications – Israeli flags for loyalist areas and Palestinian iconography for republican areas.
Holohan claims that another factor in Ireland’s outlook has been its tiny community of approximately 2,500 Jews – barely 0.05% of the population – that contrasts with sizeable and influential Jewish communities in Britain and France.
Ireland was the first EU state to endorse Palestinian statehood – in 1980 – and the first last month to publicly denounce  the Hungarian commissioner, Olivér Várhelyi, after he unilaterally announced on social media that all funding for Palestinians would be suspended. Varadkar also accused Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission’s pro-Israel president, of “ lacking balance  ”.
Ireland got public support from Jean Asselborn, Luxembourg’s outgoing foreign minister. He told reporters this week, before his last ministers’ summit in Brussels, that for the past decade EU member states “didn’t give a fuck” about Palestinian statehood – with two exceptions. “There were two countries here that tried to put it on the agenda, me and the Irish.”
Ireland strives to nudge the EU towards “a more just” position but avoids solo runs, said Holohan, who noted that France and other members had echoed its call for a ceasefire. “We want to remain within the European consensus.”
On Thursday Martin, the foreign minister, visited a kibbutz that was targeted on 7 October and met Israeli and Palestinian leaders. He called the Hamas attack “savage” and reiterated a plea for a ceasefire in Gaza, saying Israel’s belief in a military solution was mistaken.
Ireland’s underdog impulse originally resulted in support for the Jewish quest for an embryonic nation state – a sentiment reciprocated by the Zionist Irgun movement that drew on the experience of Irish rebels when it fought the British occupation of Palestine in the 1940s.
But Israel’s capture of the West Bank in 1967  and invasion of Lebanon in 1982  – which put Irish UN peacekeepers in the firing line – helped tilt Dublin’s sympathies.
“It has morphed into the narrative that while the Irish fought to remove the occupiers so, too, are the Palestinians trying to remove the ‘occupiers’,” said Maurice Cohen, chair of the Jewish Representative Council of Ireland. He said people forgot that the former Israeli president Chaim Herzog – father of the current president, Isaac Herzog – was born in Belfast and grew up in Dublin.
Antisemitism was proliferating on social media and condemnation of Hamas atrocities tended to be perfunctory – “a collective ‘selective amnesia’ to October 7 appears to have set in”, said Cohen. “Most concerning is the surreptitious shunning and remarks and collective blame in the workplace where there are Jewish people and Israelis present.”
Holohan, the retired diplomat, said Irish people had a blind spot about Hamas , which he called a repressive and extremist Islamist organisation. “They simply don’t know enough about it.”
Cieren Perry, a councillor who sponsored a failed motion to fly a Palestinian flag over Dublin city hall, said he hoped outrage over Gaza’s suffering would force the Irish government to send stronger signals to Washington and Brussels. “It’s mad, mind-boggling, to think there are people not calling for a ceasefire.”
 This article was amended on 23 November 2023 to remove part of a quote for editorial reasons. An earlier footnote was wrong to state that the Jewish population in Ireland was roughly similar, proportionately, to the Jewish population in the UK. The percentage figures are in fact different by a factor of 10 (about 0.05% in Ireland, and roughly 0.5% in the UK). An earlier amendment to the text made on 21 November 2023 has been removed and the original text restored.

Load-Date: November 23, 2023


End of Document




Rightwing group pressures states to pass pro-Israel resolutions
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 11:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: US NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1009 words
Byline: Chris McGreal
Highlight: The American Legislative Exchange Council is promoting a model resolution for state legislatures to support Israel’s Gaza offensive
Body


A powerful rightwing pressure group, the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), is engineering pledges of unconditional support for Israel’s attack on Gaza by state legislatures across the US.
Alec is promoting a model resolution  expressing “support for Israel’s right to pursue without interference or condemnation the elimination of Hamas”. A version has been accepted by legislatures in at least eight states, including Pennsylvania, Nebraska and North Dakota.
The resolution adopts Israeli claims that Hamas uses “civilians as human shields” and names Iran as giving logistical support to the group.
Some state legislatures have also denounced calls for a ceasefire in Israel’s assault on Gaza, where the health ministry says more than 11,000 Palestinians have been killed, two-thirds of them women and children.
Although state legislatures have limited direct influence over Washington’s policy on Israel, Alec and allied groups have long been instrumental in mobilising political pressure by pushing local legislation and resolutions in support of the Jewish state. They include laws to block and punish  support for the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel’s oppression of the Palestinians.
Alec, which is corporate-funded but has deep ties to Christian evangelicals strongly supportive of Israel, pushed the model resolution to state legislatures after an emergency meeting two weeks ago. A copy of the agenda  obtained by the Center for Media and Democracy shows that the presentation of the case for supporting Israel was made by Rabbi Aryeh Lightstone, who is close to the country’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.
Netanyahu offered Lightstone a leading role in his 2021 election campaign, according to  the Times of Israel, after the Orthodox rabbi worked as a senior aide to the US ambassador to Jerusalem in the Trump administration, David Friedman.
Among the others who spoke at the Alec meeting was the Texas state senator Phil King, a member of the group’s board of directors. He was the lead sponsor of a bill  in support of Israel’s attack on Gaza passed by the Texas senate two days after Hamas killed about 1,200 people and abducted more than 200 in its cross-border assault on 7 October.
The resolution accused Hamas of using human shields and said Israel had the “right to pursue without interference or condemnation the elimination of Hamas”.
King said that the Texas bill formed the basis of Alec’s model resolution for other states.
“Alec encouraged other state legislatures to adopt similar resolutions which condemn Hamas’ attack on Israel and supports Israel’s right to eliminate Hamas,” he wrote. 
King was at the forefront of pushing other pro-Israel legislation in Texas. He co-authored a law against boycotts of Israel and was instrumental in Texas becoming the first state to establish a commission to oversee enforcement of the controversial International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance definition of antisemitism, which critics say has at times been used to shut down criticism of the Jewish state.
King has also helped forge ties between Israel and the Texas energy companies, and has made trips to Jewish settlements in the occupied territories.
Karla Jones, the senior director of Alec’s international relations taskforce, told  a St Louis radio programme that the Hamas attacks invigorated support for Israel.
“This has been one of the most energising issues I think I’ve ever seen. At Alec, we invoked what’s called our expedited situation provision to consider model policy rapidly in 10 days. We have already adopted the model policy and it was adopted unanimously by the members by both public- and private-sector members of our taskforce,” she said.
Alec’s chief executive, Lisa Nelson, sent an email to supporters last week saying the organisation has “long supported the Israeli people” and urging Americans to press members of their state legislatures to pass the resolution. She listed the states that have adopted Alec’s model wording in some form or other.
“If your state is not on that list, it should be,” she wrote.
Alec’s national chair, the speaker of the Florida house of representatives, Daniel Perez, told  a Christian talk radio station that the state legislature called a special session to consider a resolution in support of Israel that says the Jewish state has the right to defend itself “by eliminating Hamas without ceasefire or pause”.
The Nebraska legislature adopted  Alec’s language about Hamas using Palestinians as human shields and expressed unconditional support for Israel’s assault on Gaza.
North Dakota passed a resolution  that said Hamas was evidently in “receipt of support and funding from foreign state sponsors of terror, namely Iran”. It too said that Israel has the right to pursue its war aims in Gaza “without interference or condemnation”.
In Pennsylvania, a version sponsored by politicians with ties to Alec said that “Israel has every right to defend itself with all due and overwhelming force”. A resolution  backed by one-third of the Wyoming legislature said Israel is in a “battle over good over evil” and opposes calls for a ceasefire in Gaza.
Last year Alec promoted a variation of an older resolution passed by several states that included  a statement that “Israel is neither an attacking force nor an occupier of the lands of others”, apparently endorsing the Israeli right wing’s claim that Palestinian lands belong to the Jewish state.
Earlier versions of the same resolution explicitly supported “the establishment of a national home for the Jewish people in the historical region of the Land of Israel”, including the occupied West Bank.
Alec led the way in the drafting of laws  adopted in more than 30 states to block support for the BDS movement. The group has also sought ways to restrict criticism of Israel  on US university campuses under the guise of combatting antisemitism.
Israeli officials, including diplomats and a leader of a group representing Jewish settlers in the West Bank, have attended Alec meetings in the past.

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Israel-Hamas war live: Hamas leader Haniyeh says ‘we are approaching truce agreement’
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 4:26 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:40
Length: 17821 words
Byline: Helen Sullivan (now); Léonie Chao-Fong, Richard Luscombe, Oliver Holmes, Martin Belam and Adam Fulton (earlier)
Highlight: Hamas political bureau chief Ismail Haniyeh says Hamas is “approaching a truce agreement” and has delivered its response to Qatari officialsIsrael and Palestine: a complete guide to the crisis
Body


block-time published-time 3.24am GMT 
Reuters is now translating that statement as “close to”: 
Hamas officials are “close to reaching a truce agreement” with Israel and the group has delivered its response to Qatari mediators, Ismail Haniyeh said in a statement sent to Reuters by his aide.
block-time published-time 3.09am GMT 
Al Jazeera translates the Hamas statement slightly differently, saying that Hamas has said it is “close to reaching a truce agreement”.
This news is based off a statement released by Hamas, and it does not include more detail, with Reuters reporting, “there were no further details about the terms of the potential agreement”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.16am GMT
block-time published-time 2.44am GMT 
 Israeli bombardment kill 17 Palestinians in Nuseirat camp in Gaza – Wafa  
As we await more detail on that comment from Hamas, the Palestinian official news agency Wafa is reporting that seventeen Palestinians have been killed in Israeli bombardment of Nuseirat refugee camp in Gaza which took place at midnight.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.52am GMT
block-time published-time 2.41am GMT 
 Hamas chief says 'we are approaching a truce agreement'  
Hamas political bureau chief Ismail Haniyeh has told the Reuters news organisation that Hamas is “approaching a truce agreement”, and that the militant group has delivered its response to Qatari officials.
Qatar has been mediating with Hamas as it negotiates with Israel and the United States for the release of Israeli hostages.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.55am GMT
block-time published-time 2.37am GMT 
 Summary  
It is just after 4.20am in Gaza. Here is where things stand: 
Israeli forces continued their offensive against Hamas in northern Gaza, closing in on the Indonesian hospital where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks.  The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “appalled”  by reports that 12 people, including patients, were killed in overnight shelling at the last hospital operating in northern Gaza. Some 200 patients have been evacuated  from the Indonesian hospital on Monday, Gaza’s health ministry has said.The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that health services in Gaza have suffered “catastrophic” damage, with most hospitals no longer functioning. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s health emergencies programme, warned that the thousands of injuries sustained by civilians across Gaza, combined with the growing public health crisis  in the besieged enclave,  is a “recipe for epidemics”.  He also described Israel’s cooperation for humanitarian relief in Gaza as “subpar”. The medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said a clinic it operated in Gaza City was attacked on Monday morning.  Part of the building was engulfed in flames, it said, and four marked MSF cars were burned while a fifth was found crushed by a heavy vehicle or a tank. The charity said  it was not immediately aware of the status of one member of staff and 20 family members.Twenty-eight premature babies were rescued  from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City and taken to Egypt on Monday. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said 31 “very sick” babies were moved from al-Shifa hospital in a joint operation with the UN and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, and 12 of them had been flown to Cairo.  Three babies remain in Gaza.Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal that would see the release of a significant number of hostages,possibly in return  for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Joe Biden on Monday said he believed a deal is near , and the White House later said the US is “doing everything we can” and that it believed “we’re closer than we’ve ever been”. Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Hamas members. The families said on Monday  that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives. The row  underlines the deep divisions in Israel over how to deal with the hostage crisis.The UN secretary general has said it is clear that the war in Gaza has seen “a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented  in any conflict” since he began his role in 2017. At a press conference on Monday, António Guterres also said he did not believe a UN protectorate in Gaza would be a solution to the conflict and that war must “move in a determined, irreversible way to a two-state solution”. Relief trucks originally from Jordan entered Gaza from Egypt on Monday with the intention of setting up a new field hospitalin the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis. Jordanian state media said it hoped the facility  would help ease some of the humanitarian crisis as Israel’s forces seize medical facilities in the north.Yemen’s Houthi rebels said they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.  They have since released video footage reportedly  showing armed men seizing a ship. Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.
block-time published-time 2.14am GMT 
Here are some recent photographs from Gaza: 
    A Palestinian woman walks on building rubble following an Israeli strike in Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip on 20 November 2023. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images      Palestinians injured in airstrikes arrive at Nasser Medical Hospital on 20 November 2023 in Khan Younis, Gaza.  Photograph: Ahmad Hasaballah/Getty Images      Health personnel prepare premature babies to be transferred to Egypt after they were evacuated from Gaza’s Al-Shifa hospital, at the Emirates Crescent Hospital in Rafah, southern Gaza, 20 November 2023.  Photograph: Haitham Imad/EPA      An infant is fed by medical workers after being evacuated from Shifa hospital to Egypt.  Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images      Medics transfer a premature Palestinian baby in an incubator from Gaza to an ambulance on the Egyptian side of the Rafah border crossing.  Photograph: Egyptian Ministry of Health and Population/ZUMA Press Wire/Shutterstock      
block-time published-time 1.47am GMT 
Three people have been killed in Israeli strikes on Jabalia refugee camp, Al Jazeera’s Hani Mahmoud reports. 
Several people are believed to be trapped under rubble. 
Strikes in the Nuseirat and Bureij refugee camps Monday killed at least 40 people, according to hospital officials, and residents said dozens more were buried in the rubble.
The Guardian has not verified these reports independently. 
Repeated Israeli bombardment of Jabalia, an urban extension of Gaza City that grew out of a camp for Palestinian refugees from the 1948 Israeli-Arab war, has killed scores of civilians, Palestinian medics say.
On Monday witnesses reported bouts of heavy fighting between Hamas gunmen and Israeli forces trying to advance into Jabalia. 
block-time published-time 1.24am GMT 
Meanwhile Hezbollah and Israeli forces continue to trade fire over the border between Lebanon and Israel. 
On Monday, the IDF shelled Saint George Church in southern Lebanon, according to Lebanon’s news agency NNA. The shelling caused “significant damage”, according to NNA. No injuries were reported.
    Black smoke rises from an Israeli airstrike on the outskirts of Aita al-Shaab, a Lebanese border village with Israel as it is seen from Rmeish village in south Lebanon, Monday, 20 November 2023.  Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP   
Hezbollah said it targeted troops in northern Israel with drones, artillery and missiles on Monday, claiming a string of new attacks.
Israel’s military said tanks, a fighter jet and a helicopter struck Hezbollah targets in Lebanon in response to what it said were missile launches from “a terrorist cell”. 
block-time published-time 12.58am GMT 
A celebrated Palestinian poet and author, Mosab Abu Toha, has been arrested by Israeli forces while trying to leave Gaza, according to his friends and family.
Abu Toha had been told by US officials that he and his family would be able to cross into Egypt, as one of his children is an American citizen. They were on the way from north to south Gaza , heading for the Rafah crossing point on Sunday, when he was arrested along with other Palestinian men at an Israeli military checkpoint.
“The army took Mosab when he arrived at the checkpoint, leaving from the north to the south, as the army had ordered. The American embassy sent him and his family to go through the Rafah crossing,” the poet’s brother, Hamza, said on social media.  “We have heard nothing from him.”
 Related:  Palestinian poet Mosab Abu Toha arrested by Israelis in Gaza, family says
block-time published-time 12.24am GMT 
In breaking news, we’re seeing reports that the IDF is “storming” the city of Hebron in the West Bank. The Hamas-affiliated Shehab news agency and Al Jazeera report that IDF forces have stormed the city, with Shehab also reporting arrests. The Guardian has not verified these reports independently. 
“Israeli occupation forces storm the city of Hebron in the south of the West Bank and launch a campaign of raids and arrests,” Al Jazeera reports. 
arrtl???? | ????? #???????  : ???? ???????? ?????????? ????? ????? ?????? ???? ????? ??????? ???? ???? ??????? ?????????
— ??????? - ???? (@AJABreaking) November 21, 2023
The AP has this recent report from the West Bank: 
When Israeli warplanes swooped over the Gaza Strip following Hamas militants’ deadly attack on southern Israel, Palestinians say a different kind of war took hold in the occupied West Bank.
Overnight, the territory was closed off. Towns were raided, curfews imposed, teenagers arrested, detainees beaten, and villages stormed by Jewish vigilantes.
With the world’s attention on Gaza and the humanitarian crisis there, the violence of war has also erupted in the West Bank. Israeli settler attacks have surged at an unprecedented rate, according to the United Nations. The escalation has spread fear, deepened despair, and robbed Palestinians of their livelihoods, their homes and, in some cases, their lives.
Before the Hamas assault, 2023 already was the deadliest year for Palestinians in the West Bank in over two decades, with 250 Palestinians killed by Israeli fire, most during military operations.
Over these six weeks of war, Israeli security forces have killed another 206 Palestinians, the Palestinian Health Ministry said, the result of a rise in army raids backed by airstrikes and Palestinian militant attacks. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.36am GMT
block-time published-time 12.16am GMT 
Al Jazeera’s Hani Mahmoud reports that the “northern part of Gaza City right now is under heavy bombardment and air strikes”.
Mahmoud is in Khan Younis, in southern Gaza, and writes, “Where we are reporting from, in Khan Younis, has also been a major target of Israeli air strikes. We are talking about both sides – the eastern side of Khan Younis and the western side of the city.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.16am GMT
block-time published-time 12.13am GMT 
In case you missed this earlier: the US believes that Israel and Hamas are getting closer to a deal that would secure the release of some hostages held in Gaza, even as the Israeli military’s deadly assault on Gaza City continued and rockets were being fired into Israel. US President Joe Biden said on Monday he believed an accord was near. “We’re closer now than we’ve been before,” White House spokesman John Kirby said of a hostage agreement.
    Red Cross President Mirjana Spoljaric.  Photograph: Denis Balibouse/Reuters   
Mirjana Spoljaric, president of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), met in Qatar on Monday with Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh to “advance humanitarian issues” related to the conflict, the Geneva-based ICRC said in a statement. She also met separately with Qatari authorities. The organisation said it was not part of negotiations aimed at releasing the hostages. But as a neutral intermediary it was ready “to facilitate any future release that the parties agree to,” it said.
block-time published-time 12.05am GMT 
The Israeli military has barred 750 families in Hebron’s Old City from stepping outside except for one hour in the morning and one in the evening on Sundays, Tuesdays and Thursday, residents and Israeli human rights organization B’Tselem have told the Associated Press. 
700 radical Jewish settlers live among 34,000 Palestinians under heavy military protection in Hebron, in the occupied West Bank. 
    Israeli security forces stand near the bodies of two Palestinian men at a checkpoint in the northern entrance of the occupied West Bank city of Hebron on 17 November 2023. The Palestinian health ministry said two people were killed "by Israeli army bullets" at the entrance to the flashpoint city of Hebron. The Israeli army said "two assailants arrived in a vehicle at a junction adjacent to Hebron and fired at the soldiers who were operating in the area". "The soldiers responded with fire and killed the assailants" before seizing a weapon, a statement said, adding there were no Israeli casualties.  Photograph: Hazem Bader/AFP/Getty Images   
The AP reports, “Schools have closed. Work has stopped. Sick people have moved in with relatives in the Palestinian-controlled part of town. Israeli settlers often roam at night, taunting Palestinians trapped indoors, according to footage published by B’Tselem.” 
Asked about the curfew, the Israeli military said that it had set up more checkpoints “as part of the security operations in the area.” Palestinian militant attacks have increased significantly since the war, it added.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.07am GMT
block-time published-time 11.45pm GMT 
If you’re just joining us, Israeli forces are fighting near Gaza’s Indonesian hospital, where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks. Health officials have managed to evacuate some of the wounded, but a medical worker inside the facility and the Health Ministry said a shell struck the second floor of the hospital, killing 12 people. 
    Palestinians wounded in Israeli strikes lie on the floor as they are assisted at the Indonesian hospital. Photograph: Reuters   
The health official blamed Israel, which denied shelling the hospital, saying its troops returned fire on militants who targeted them from inside the 3.5-acre (1.4 hectare) compound.
Meanwhile 28 premature babies were evacuated from Gaza City’s Shifa Hospital by the World Health Organization and transported to Egypt on Monday. Three others were transferred to an Emirati-run hospital in Rafah in southern Gaza, the Red Crescent said. More than 250 critically ill or wounded patients remain stranded at the compound that Israeli forces stormed days ago.
    A Palestinian medic cares for premature babies evacuated from Gaza City's Al Shifa hospital ahead of their transfer from a hospital in Rafah to Egypt, on 20 November 2023. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 11.11pm GMT 
EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell said Monday that the establishment of a Palestinian state would be the best way of ensuring Israel’s security.
Borrell held a video meeting with foreign ministers from the EU’s 27 countries after touring the Middle East for talks on Israel’s war with Hamas.
The EU’s top diplomat said that he had drawn “a fundamental political conclusion” from his discussions across the region.
“I think that the best guarantee for Israel’s security is the creation of a Palestinian state,” Borrell said in a written summary of the EU meeting.
Borrell has insisted Israel should not occupy Gaza after the current conflict ends and that control of the territory should be handed over to the Palestinian Authority.
“Despite the huge challenges, we have to advance our reflections on the stabilisation of Gaza and the future Palestinian state,” he said.
In the short-term, Borrell said, after visiting a string of Arab states, that there was a “sense of urgency” over the desperate humanitarian situation in Gaza.
“The UN Security Council resolution calling for immediate humanitarian pauses is a big step forward, but we must ensure its rapid implementation,” he said.
This is Helen Sullivan taking over the Guardian’s live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war. 
block-time published-time 11.00pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s 1am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of today’s developments:
Israeli forces continued their offensive against Hamas in northern Gaza, closing in on the Indonesian hospital where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks.  The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “appalled”  by reports that 12 people, including patients, were killed in overnight shelling at the last hospital operating in northern Gaza. Some 200 patients have been evacuated  from the Indonesian hospital on Monday, Gaza’s health ministry has said.The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned that health services in Gaza have suffered “catastrophic” damage, with most hospitals no longer functioning. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO’s health emergencies programme, warned that the thousands of injuries sustained by civilians across Gaza, combined with the growing public health crisis  in the besieged enclave,  is a “recipe for epidemics”.  He also described Israel’s cooperation for humanitarian relief in Gaza as “subpar”. The medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said a clinic it operated in Gaza City was attacked on Monday morning.  Part of the building was engulfed in flames, it said, and four marked MSF cars were burned while a fifth was found crushed by a heavy vehicle or a tank. The charity said  it was not immediately aware of the status of one member of staff and 20 family members.Twenty-eight premature babies were rescued  from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City and taken to Egypt on Monday. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said 31 “very sick” babies were moved from al-Shifa hospital in a joint operation with the UN and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, and 12 of them had been flown to Cairo.  Three babies remain in Gaza.Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal that would see the release of a significant number of hostages,possibly in return  for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Joe Biden on Monday said he believed a deal is near , and the White House later said the US is “doing everything we can” and that it believed “we’re closer than we’ve ever been”. Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Hamas members. The families said on Monday  that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives. The row  underlines the deep divisions in Israel over how to deal with the hostage crisis.The UN secretary general has said it is clear that the war in Gaza has seen “a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented  in any conflict” since he began his role in 2017. At a press conference on Monday, António Guterres also said he did not believe a UN protectorate in Gaza would be a solution to the conflict and that war must “move in a determined, irreversible way to a two-state solution”. Relief trucks originally from Jordan entered Gaza from Egypt on Monday with the intention of setting up a new field hospitalin the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis. Jordanian state media said it hoped the facility  would help ease some of the humanitarian crisis as Israel’s forces seize medical facilities in the north.Yemen’s Houthi rebels said they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.  They have since released video footage reportedly  showing armed men seizing a ship. Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.09pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.46pm GMT 
 A celebrated Palestinian poet and author, Mosab Abu Toha, has been arrested by Israeli forces while trying to leave Gaza, according to his friends and family. 
Abu Toha had been told by US officials that he and his family would be able to cross into Egypt, as one of his children is an American citizen. They were on the way from north to south Gaza, heading for the Rafah crossing point on Sunday, when he was arrested along with other Palestinian men at a Israeli military checkpoint.
    The IDF has not responded to requests for information about the whereabouts of Mosab Abu Toha, whose poetry got to the final of the National Book Critics Circle award in the US. Photograph: Facebook   
The poet’s brother, Hamza, said on social media  :
The army took Mosab when he arrived at the checkpoint, leaving from the north to the south, as the army had ordered. The American embassy sent him and his family to go through the Rafah crossing. We have heard nothing from him.
Abu Toha had been writing in the New Yorker magazine about his experiences under bombardment in Jabalia refugee camp in northern Gaza. A collection of his poetry published in English in the US was a finalist in the National Book Critics Circle award and won an American Book award this year.
block-time published-time 10.36pm GMT 
 Twenty-eight prematurely born babies evacuated from Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital were taken to Egypt for urgent treatment on Monday. 
The WHO chief, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said on Sunday that 31 “very sick” babies were moved in a joint operation with the UN and the Palestinian Red Crescent Society.
The babies were transported to a hospital in Rafah, on the southern border of Gaza, so their condition could be stabilised ahead of transfer to Egypt.
Tedros said 12 had been flown on to Cairo.
Three babies remained in Gaza, two for family reasons and one because the family could not be identified.
    12 of the 28 premature babies transfer to hospitals to receive treatment after they arrive in Egypt from al-Shifa. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images      Medics treat premature Palestinian babies evacuated from Gaza at the New Administrative Capital (NAC) in the east of Cairo, Egypt. Photograph: The Egyptian Health Ministry/Reuters      A group of 28 premature babies have crossed into Egypt after being evacuated from Gaza’s besieged al-Shifa hospital. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Anadolu/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.41pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.15pm GMT 
 The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) said at least 50 journalists and media workers have been killed since the war began, updating  a previous statement earlier today  that put the death toll at 48. 
The second-deadliest day occurred on Saturday 18 November, the CPJ said, with five journalists killed.
The deadliest day of the war was its first day, 7 October, with six journalists killed, it said.
enltrAs of November 20, in the #Israel  - #Gaza  war, CPJ has documented: - 50 journalists and media workers dead: 45 Palestinian, 4 Israeli, and 1 Lebanese - 11 journalists injured - 3 journalists missing - 18 journalists arrested - Multiple assaults, threats, cyberattacks, censorship,…
— Committee to Protect Journalists (@pressfreedom) November 20, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 10.06pm GMT 
 Gaza health ministry says 200 patients evacuated from Indonesian hospital  
Two hundred patients have been evacuated from the Indonesian hospital in northern Gaza on Monday with the help of the Red Cross, Gaza’s health ministry has said.
The Gaza health ministry spokesperson, Ashraf al-Qudra, told AFP that the 200 people were evacuated from the hospital and taken by bus to Nasser hospital in the southern town of Khan Yunis. He told the news agency:
The Israeli army is laying siege to the Indonesian hospital.
An AFP reporter in Khan Yunis saw two buses arriving at Nasser hospital.
The ministry of health in Gaza earlier today said it believed 12 people had been killed in shelling overnight and that it feared a repeat of what happened at al-Shifa hospital complex , which was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces last week.
“We fear the same thing will happen there as it did in al-Shifa,” Qudra said, adding:
There are still 400 patients in the hospital and we are working with the ICRC to evacuate.
Israeli forces were closing in on the packed Indonesian hospital on Monday despite hopes that a ceasefire-for-hostages deal may be agreed.
Video broadcast on  Al Jazeera TV on Monday showed damage to what were described as patient facilities, while daytime footage on social media appeared to show Israeli tanks close to the medical complex.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.11pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.58pm GMT 
 The WHO’s emergency response director, Michael Ryan, described Israel’s cooperation for humanitarian relief in Gaza as “subpar”. 
He acknowledged that the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) had facilitated the entrance and exit of aid workers into al-Shifa hospital for the transportation of premature babies, “that has not been the case as a constant”, adding:
It has been exceptionally difficult to put in place a proper notification and deconfliction system and we have been operating for weeks without that system in place, and without that cooperation necessary to run humanitarian operations in a conflict zone.
Ryan specifically called out the Israeli defence ministry unit known as the Coordinator of Government Activities in the Territories (Cogat), NBC reported.
The engagement between the WHO and Cogat “has been subpar to say the least, and has not been efficient”, he said.
block-time published-time 9.38pm GMT 
 The World Health Organization (WHO)‘s emergency response director, Michael Ryan, warned that the thousands of injuries sustained by civilians across Gaza, combined with the growing public health crisis  in the besieged enclave,  is a “recipe for epidemics”. 
Speaking to journalists at the UN headquarters in New York, Ryan said “so many children” remain in danger in Gaza, with up to 1,500 children missing – many likely under rubble.
He said following the evacuation of many patients at Gaza City’s al-Shifa hospital over the weekend, health staff remaining at the Indonesian hospital in northern Gaza may also need to be evacuated in the next few days amid continued fighting there.
The ultimatum from Israeli forces to keep moving is creating a concentration of people sheltering in centres and schools run by the UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) that “fuels epidemic risks”, he said. Combined with the recent cold rain, that could lead to a spike in child pneumonia, he said.
block-time published-time 9.31pm GMT 
 WHO official says health services in Gaza have suffered 'catastrophic' damage  
 The World Health Organization (WHO)  has warned that health services in Gaza have suffered “catastrophic” damage, with most hospitals no longer functioning.
 Michael Ryan,  executive director of the WHO’s health emergencies programme, said 1.7 million people have been displaced in Gaza, “so we have twice or three times the population [in the south of Gaza], using one-third of the hospital beds in less than a third of the hospitals available”. He added:
Even if tomorrow morning, this were to end in terms of a ceasefire, we still have a huge problem on our hands.
Health services have been unable to provide care for more complex medical cases – including care for most cancer and kidney dialysis patients, he said. In addition, about 5,500 births are expected in the next month, which will likely overwhelm the system, he said.
The hospital situation – the primary health care system situation – in Gaza is catastrophic and it is the worst you can imagine [in the] north.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.33pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.23pm GMT 
 The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said it has interrogated more than 300 members of Hamas and other militant groups arrested in Gaza during its ground invasion. 
The interrogations have revealed the locations of underground tunnels, warehouses, weapons and Hamas’s use of civilian infrastructure, AP reported a senior Israeli military official saying.
Each and every interrogation leads to the release of new locations and the human intelligence that emerges from the Gaza Strip.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.25pm GMT
block-time published-time 9.06pm GMT 
     Israeli infantry soldiers pray in a synagogue near the border during training in readiness for possible deployment across the border into Gaza in southern Israel.  Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 8.57pm GMT 
 The president of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Mirjana Spoljaric, has met with the head of Hamas’s political bureau, Ismaël Haniyeh, in Qatar today. 
Spoljaric also met separately with Qatari authorities as part of the ICRC’s efforts to secure the release of Israeli hostages held by the militant group, it said.
In a statement , the ICRC said it has insisted “that our teams be allowed to visit the hostages to check on their welfare and deliver medications, and for the hostages to be able to communicate with their families”, adding:
Agreements must be reached that allow the ICRC to safely carry out this work. The ICRC cannot force its way in to where hostages are held, nor do we know their location.
Spoljaric has also met multiple times in recent weeks with families of hostages held in Gaza, as well as Israel’s foreign minister, Eli Cohen. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.42pm GMT 
 Israeli forces close in on Indonesian hospital sheltering thousands of people  
 Israeli forces continued their offensive against Hamas in northern Gaza, closing in on the Indonesian hospital where thousands of patients and displaced people have been sheltering for weeks. 
A dozen people reportedly have been killed after a blast at the facility which Gaza’s health ministry blamed on Israeli forces. The Israel Defense Forces denied firing a shell but said it returned fire on militants inside the hospital compound.
Video broadcast on Al Jazeera  showed damage to what were described as patient facilities, while daytime footage on social media appeared to show that Israeli tanks were close to the medical complex.
Here’s our video report:
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.22pm GMT 
Video of premature babies being evacuated  to safety from Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital as part of a United Nations operation was posted to X, formerly Twitter, by Unicef Palestine.
enltr31 babies were rescued from Al-Shifa hospital. The operation was conducted as part of an interagency @UN  effort, with @WHOoPt , @ochaopt , @UNRWA , @UNMAS  and the Palestinian Red Crescent. pic.twitter.com/QELWO5hfeU
 — UNICEF Palestine (@UNICEFpalestine) November 20, 2023
The tweet says 31 babies were “rescued”. The figure contradicts earlier reports that said 28 were evacuated and three babies remained in Gaza  because the families of two of them wanted them to remain there for “personal reasons”, and because a third was unidentified.
A medical spokesperson told the BBC that the babies remaining in Gaza were in a stable condition.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.24pm GMT
block-time published-time 8.06pm GMT 
Reporters at the White House briefing were also given logistical updates on humanitarian efforts under way in Gaza. 
 John Kirby, strategic communications coordinator to the national security council, said six trucks had crossed into the war-ravaged territory on Monday with about 18,000 gallons of fuel.
    National security council strategic communications director John Kirby updates reporters at the White House on Monday. Photograph: Shutterstock   
About 100 trucks carrying aid had been allowed into Gaza over the weekend, he added; and that the number of US citizens who have left Gaza through the Rafah crossing with Egypt had reached 800:
We’re continuing to advocate for humanitarian pauses so that people can get out of harm’s way and that aid and assistance can get in.
We expect those deliveries to continue on a regular basis. And hopefully in larger quantities. I’m talking about the fuel specifically.
Kirby added the US had “made it clear” to Israel that it had obligations to safeguard civilians as it expanded its military operations in the south of Gaza, as well as allowing safe passage to hostages if a deal is struck:
If you’re going to secure the release of hostages, and we certainly hope we’re going to be able to do that soon, you’ve got to make sure they can get from where they are to safety, and do that as safely as possible.
Which means you’re gonna have to have at least a temporary localized stop in the fighting to allow them to move.
Kirby said Israel had been observing temporary humanitarian pauses in some areas of between four and seven hours at a time.
block-time published-time 7.46pm GMT 
 White House: 'Closer than we've ever been' to hostage deal  
 Joe Biden ’s administration is “doing everything we can” to achieve an agreement to free hostages held by Hamas in Gaza, strategic communications coordinator for the national security council John Kirby has just told reporters at the White House.
He said the president was hopeful a deal could be reached to release all the hostages, “including young children, and of course Americans that are in that pool”:
We’re still working this hour by hour … we believe we’re closer than we’ve ever been.
So we’re hopeful. But there’s still work to be done. And nothing is done until it’s all done. So we’re gonna keep working on this.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.54pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.36pm GMT 
 South Africa will host a virtual summit of the so-called Bric group of nations on Tuesday to discuss the Israel-Hamas war, AFP reported. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, whose country is currently pursuing its own war in Ukraine, will attend.
Also participating will be the United Nations UN secretary general, Ant ónio Guterres.
The Bric countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa – are a group of major emerging economies seeking to reshape the US and western-led global order.
Tuesday’s “Extraordinary Joint Meeting on the Middle East Situation in Gaza” will be hosted by the South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, in the hope of drawing up a common response to the more than six-week conflict, AFP said.
Leaders from Saudi Arabia, Argentina, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran and the United Arab Emirates – who are all due to join the Brics group in January – will attend the meeting.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.28pm GMT 
More than two dozen Bosnians and their Palestinian relatives who were stuck in Gaza arrived in Sarajevo on Monday, after evacuating through Egypt last week.
The group received medical check-ups at Sarajevo airport before being reunited with their families and friends, Reuters reported.
Those without relatives in Bosnia will be accommodated in a refugee center, officials said.
“I have been in the Gaza Strip for 40 days of war,” said Khaled Mosleh, a Palestinian with Bosnian residence who went to Gaza to visit his sick mother and got stuck there. Mosleh graduated from the Sarajevo medical school and lives in Bosnia with his wife and five children.
“The situation is very difficult,” he said of life in Gaza. “When you think that you will get killed two, three times a day, it is inconceivable. The humanitarian situation is non-existent, there is a smell of death at the streets of Gaza, the death is everywhere.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.32pm GMT
block-time published-time 7.11pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far  
It’s just past 9pm in Gaza City and Tel Aviv. Here’s a recap of the latest developments:
A dozen people reportedly have been killed at the Indonesian hospital, the last hospital operating in northern Gaza.  There was no immediate comment from the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), as Israeli forces closed in on the packed hospital. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said he was “appalled”  by reports that 12 people, including patients were killed, in the hospital attack. Indonesia’s foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, condemned Israel’s reported attack  on the hospital.The medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said a clinic it operated in Gaza City was attacked on Monday morning.  Part of the building was engulfed in flames, it said, and four marked MSF cars were burned while a fifth was found crushed by a heavy vehicle or a tank. The charity said  it was not immediately aware of the status of one member of staff and 20 family members.Twenty-eight premature babies were rescued  from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City and taken to Egypt on Monday. The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said 12 of the premature babies have been flown to Cairo.  Three babies remain in Gaza.Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal that would see the release of a significant number of hostages,possibly in return  for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, all suggested an agreement was close on Sunday. Joe Biden on Monday said he believed a deal is near. Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Hamas members. The families said on Monday  that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives. The row  underlines the deep divisions in Israel over how to deal with the hostage crisis.Israel’s military has released security camera footage it claims shows hostages being brought into al-Shifa hospital  in Gaza City on 7 October after being kidnapped.  The first clip shows a man in shorts and a pale blue shirt being dragged through what looks like an entrance hall by five men. In the second, an injured man in underwear is wheeled in on a gurney by seven men. It has not been possible to verify the footage independently.The UN secretary general has said it is clear that the war in Gaza has seen “a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented  in any conflict” since he began his role in 2017. At a press conference on Monday, António Guterres also said he did not believe a UN protectorate in Gaza would be a solution to the conflict and that war must “move in a determined, irreversible way to a two-state solution”. The African Union (AU) has said that Israel’s response to Hamas’s  attack last month was “inexcusable”. AU chairman, Azali Assoumani, at a press conference in Berlin on Monday, warned that civilian casualties would fuel further “extremism”. China “opposes any forced displacement and relocation of Palestinian civilians” and calls on Israel to “stop its collective punishment of the people in Gaza”, foreign minister Wang Yi said.  “A ceasefire should not be a diplomatic rhetoric. It is a matter of life and death for the people in Gaza.  A ceasefire should be achieved as a top priority,” Wang said on Monday.Relief trucks originally from Jordan entered Gaza from Egypt on Monday with the intention of setting up a new field hospitalin the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis. Jordanian state media said it hoped the facility  would help ease some of the humanitarian crisis as Israel’s forces seize medical facilities in the north.The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) said 48 journalists and media workers have been killed in the Israel-Hamas war. The conflict has led to the deadliest month for journalists since it first began gathering data in 1992, the CPJ said on Monday.Yemen’s Houthi rebels said they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.  They have since released video footage reportedly  showing armed men seizing a ship. Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.30pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.44pm GMT 
 Israel has recalled its ambassador to South Africa for consultations following the “latest statements from South Africa”, according to its foreign ministry. 
It comes after South Africa’s ruling party said it would support a parliamentary motion calling for the Israeli embassy in South Africa to be closed.
In a statement on Thursday, the African National Congress (ANC) also welcomed a call from Cyril Ramaphosa,  the president, for the international criminal court to investigate Israel for war crimes. The ANC statement said:
Given the unfolding atrocities in occupied Palestine, the African National Congress will agree to a parliamentary motion which calls upon the government to close the Israeli embassy in South Africa and suspend all diplomatic relations with Israel until it agrees to a ceasefire.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.02pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.30pm GMT 
 Hostages’ families clash with Israeli politicians over talk of death penalty  
Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Hamas members.
The families said on Monday  that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives.
“I beg you not to capitalise on our suffering now … when the lives of our loved ones are at stake, when the sword is at their necks,” Gil Dickmann, whose cousin is a hostage, told Itamar Ben-Gvir,   Israel’s national security minister, according to Haaretz.
 Yarden Gonen, whose sister Romi is among the hostages, told Ben-Gvir and his far-right party colleagues during a parliamentary panel that the proposal to introduce potential capital sentences for convicted militants would mean “playing along with [the] mind games” of Hamas. She said:
And in return we would get pictures of our loved ones murdered, ended, with the state of Israel and not them [Hamas] being blamed for it … Don’t pursue this until after they are back here. Don’t put my sister’s blood on your hands.
When confronted by relatives of the hostages opposing such a change, far-right politicians shouted that they did not have “a monopoly of pain” in comments that appalled many Israelis.
 Related:  Hostages’ families clash with Israeli politicians over talk of death penalty
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.08pm GMT
block-time published-time 6.21pm GMT 
 The families of the hostages in Gaza are fuming after some of them were not allowed to attend a meeting with Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanayahu, and his war cabinet. 
Some representatives of the families were told there was not enough space to accommodate everyone, despite the families having provided a list of 107 representatives ahead of time, the Times of Israel reported.
The families who could not enter are planning to protest at the gate to the Kirya military base in Tel Aviv where the meeting is taking place, Haaretz reported.
    Families of the hostages wait to enter a meeting with Prime Minster Benjamin Netanyahu and the war cabinet at the Kirya in Tel Aviv, Israel.  Photograph: Alexi J Rosenfeld/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 6.12pm GMT 
 Yemen’s Houthi rebels have released video footage reportedly showing armed men dropping from a helicopter and seizing a cargo ship in the Red Sea. 
enltrNEW VIDEO: Yemen’s Houthi rebels hijack a cargo ship in the Red Sea over the weekend pic.twitter.com/pkkUJpbe5c
 — Trey Yingst (@TreyYingst) November 20, 2023
The footage was released a day after Houthi rebels said they had seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea , warning that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.
Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship.
block-time published-time 6.02pm GMT 
     A mother covers her daughter as a siren sounds signalling incoming rockets launched from the Gaza Strip towards Israel in Tel Aviv, Israel. Photograph: Itai Ron/Reuters      
block-time published-time 5.55pm GMT 
 The head of the World Health Organization (WHO) said 12 of the premature babies rescued from Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital have been flown to Cairo. 
In an effort coordinated by the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, 28 premature babies were rescued from al-Shifa hospital and taken to Egypt earlier today. Three babies remained in Gaza.
Posting to social media, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus  said:
All babies are fighting serious infections and other conditions, and need specialised medical care.
enltrToday, 28 of the 31 premature babies, who were evacuated from the Al-Shifa hospital yesterday, were safely transferred in Al-Arish to receive medical treatment in #Egypt.  From there, 12 babies were flown to Cairo. Three babies continue to receive treatment at the Emarati… pic.twitter.com/SZjKbRUojJ
 — Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (@DrTedros) November 20, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.40pm GMT 
 Biden says he believes a hostage deal will come soon  
 Joe Biden has said he believes a deal to secure the release of hostages being held by Hamas is near.
The US president was answering a question by a reporter while at a turkey pardoning ceremony at the White House on Monday.
When asked how soon, the president was seen crossing his fingers.
enltrReporter: “Mr. President, is a hostage deal near?” Biden: “I believe so.” Reporter: “You believe so?” Biden: “Yes!” pic.twitter.com/sqUma6KylN
 — The Recount (@therecount) November 20, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.06pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.31pm GMT 
 Guterres says war must lead in 'irreversible way to a two-state solution'  
 António Guterres, at a press conference on Monday, said he did not believe a UN protectorate in Gaza would be a solution to the conflict. 
The UN secretary general said it was “important to be able to transform this tragedy into an opportunity”, which was to “move in a determined, irreversible way to a two-state solution”, adding:
I believe it to be important after the war to have a strengthened Palestinian Authority to assume responsibilities in Gaza.
He said a humanitarian ceasefire was a crucial first step, along with unrestricted access for humanitarian aid and the release of hostages.
He added the Palestinian Authority could clearly not return to Gaza while Israeli tanks remain, meaning there must be a “transition period”. He said:
I think we need a multi-stakeholder approach in which different countries, different entities, will cooperate. For Israel, of course, the US is the main guarantor of its security. For Palestinians, the neighbouring and Arab countries of the region are essential.
So everybody needs to come together to make the conditions for a transition, allowing for a strengthened Palestinian Authority, to assume responsibility in Gaza and then, based on that, to finally move... in a determined and irreversible way to a two-state solution based on the principles that have been largely established by the international community and which I have time and time again outlined.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.53pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.24pm GMT 
 World is witnessing an 'unparalleled and unprecedented' killing of civilians in Gaza, says UN chief  
The UN secretary general, António Guterres, has said it is clear that the war in Gaza has seen “a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented in any conflict” since he began his role in 2017.
Guterres, in a press conference on Monday, said: “What is clear is that we have had in a few weeks thousands of children killed.”
His remarks came as Gaza authorities said at least 13,300 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza since  7 October . The death toll, published by Gaza’s government media office on Monday, includes 5,600 children and 3,550 women.
Guterres said:
This is what matters. We are witnessing a killing of civilians that is unparalleled and unprecedented in any conflict since I have been secretary general.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 5.03pm GMT 
 Spain’s newly re-elected prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, will travel to Israel and  Palestine on Thursday, his office has said. 
Sánchez will travel alongside his Belgian counterpart Alexander de Croo, according to a statement from his office.
Both leaders will meet with Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s president Isaac Herzog and the Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas, the statement added.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.05pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.46pm GMT 
 The Palestine Red Crescent Society (PRCS) has said it transferred 28 premature babies into Egypt  in ambulances, after 31 were evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza. 
A total of 28 premature babies were rescued from Shifa hospital and taken to Egypt in an effort coordinated by the PRCS. Three babies remained in Gaza, two for family reasons, and one because the family could not be identified.
They were evacuated after Gaza’s biggest hospital was no longer able to function after an IDF raid. Israel has said Hamas has command centres underneath hospitals in Gaza but Hamas has denied this.
Some mothers of the premature babies were present at the crossing, one woman described the ordeal of having to leave her baby inside al-Shifa while she evacuated south.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.50pm GMT
block-time published-time 4.28pm GMT 
 A dozen people were reportedly killed at a second major medical facility in northern Gaza on Monday as Israeli forces closed in around the packed Indonesian hospital despite hopes that a ceasefire for hostages deal may be agreed. 
Video broadcast on al-Jazeera  showed damage to what were described as patient facilities, while daytime footage on social media appeared to show that Israeli tanks were close by the medical complex.
One medical worker, Marwan Abdallah, said the tanks were clearly visible from the hospital windows. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire,” he added.
The ministry of health in Gaza said it believed 12 had been killed in shelling overnight and that it feared a repeat of what happened at the al-Shifa hospital complex, which was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces last week.
There was no immediate comment from the Israel Defense Forces, although in the past  the Israeli military has said that it believed that a Hamas tunnel entrance is near to the Indonesian hospital and that missiles were launched into Israel from nearby.
block-time published-time 4.08pm GMT 
 Here’s more  from China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, who held talks with his counterparts from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan, the Palestinian Authority and Indonesia on Monday. 
China has “firmly stood on the side of justice and fairness” and has been “working hard to de-escalate the conflict” in Gaza, the Chinese foreign ministry said in a statement.
A ceasefire should not be a diplomatic rhetoric. It is a matter of life and death for the people in Gaza. A ceasefire should be achieved as a top priority.
Beijing “opposes any forced displacement and relocation of Palestinian civilians”, Wang said, calling on Israel to “stop its collective punishment of the people in Gaza” and for humanitarian corridors to be opened “as soon as possible to prevent a wider humanitarian disaster”.
    Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, foreground centre, stands with his counterparts from left, Palestinian foreign minister, Riyad al-Maliki, Egyptian foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister, Faisal bin Farhan Al Saud, Jordanian deputy prime minister and foreign minister, Ayman Safadi, Indonesian foreign minister, Retno Marsudi,secretary-general of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), Hissein Brahim Taha, in Beijing. Photograph: Andy Wong/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.23pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.53pm GMT 
 Jordan’s Crown Prince Hussein  has arrived in Egypt to oversee the  planning of a field hospital  in Gaza, the first since the war began on 7 October.
The director general of Gaza hospitals has said the field hospital will be established in Khan Younis , in the south, “to receive the wounded and the sick”.
The hospital has a 41-bed capacity, according to the Jordanian royal palace. It was accompanied by 170 personnel and 40 trucks of medical aid, the head of medical aid in Gaza said.
enltrHis Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein arrives in El Arish, Egypt, to oversee the preparation and dispatch of the special Jordanian field hospital/2 for southern #Gaza  which has the capacity of 41 beds #Jordan pic.twitter.com/1hl49oaD6
 — RHC (@RHCJO) November 20, 2023
Palestinian medics hope field hospitals sent by the United Arab Emirates and Qatar will soon follow.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.01pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.35pm GMT 
 Doctors without Borders (MSF) has said its clinic in Gaza City came under fire this morning, and part of the building was “engulfed by fire” as heavy fighting took place all around it. 
A member of staff and 20 family members are in the clinic and in “extreme danger”, the medical organisation said in a statement, as it urgently called for a stop to the fighting in the area.
More than 50 other people, including other MSF staff, are in nearby buildings, it said, as well as a wounded person requiring medical attention.
It said that four of its cars were burned, and a fifth was “broken in two pieces as if crushed by a heavy-duty vehicle or a tank.” It added that “an Israeli tank was seen in the street”.
All the cars and the clinic were clearly identified as being part of the charity, it said, adding:
The cars destroyed are the same that were used to attempt the aborted evacuation of MSF staff and their families on 18 November, resulting in the killing of one of their family members. They were the only means of transport they had to facilitate their evacuation.
enltrAn MSF staff member and 20 relatives are in the clinic and in extreme danger. We don’t know their status. We urgently call for a stop to the fighting in the area. Over 50 other people, including MSF staff, are in nearby buildings, with a wounded person needing medical attention.
— MSF International (@MSF) November 20, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.12pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.23pm GMT 
The head of the World Health Organization (WHO), Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesu s, has said he is “appalled” by the reports of an attack  on the Indonesian hospital in Gaza.
The attack killed 12 people, including patients, he posted to social media on Monday, citing unspecified reports. He added:
Health workers and civilians should never have to be exposed to such horror, and especially while inside a hospital.
enltr. @WHO  is appalled by an attack on the Indonesian Hospital in #Gaza , reportedly resulting in 12 deaths, including patients, and tens of injuries, including critical and life-threatening ones. Health workers and civilians should never have to be exposed to such horror, and…
— Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus (@DrTedros) November 20, 2023
Hello, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong in Washington taking over the live blog. You can reach me at leonie.chao-fong@theguardian.com.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.55pm GMT
block-time published-time 3.13pm GMT 
 African Union chief says Israeli actions in Gaza are 'inexcusable'  
The African Union (AU) has said that Israel’s response to Hamas’s massive attack last month was “inexcusable”, warning that civilian casualties would fuel further “extremism”.
AU chairman, Azali Assoumani, at a press conference in Berlin, said:
The acts (of Hamas) are reprehensible... but the response is inexcusable.
Imagine a child who has seen his mother, who has seen his father killed... it creates extremism.
     African Union chairman, Azali Assoumani, at a news conference during the G20 Investment Summit. Photograph: Markus Schreiber/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.54pm GMT
block-time published-time 2.52pm GMT 
 48 journalists killed in Israel-Hamas war, rights body says  
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) has provided an update  on the journalists and media workers killed by the war.
CPJ says the conflict has led to the deadliest month for journalists since it first began gathering data in 1992.
As of 20 November, CPJ found:
48 journalists and media workers were confirmed dead: 43 Palestinian, 4 Israeli, and 1 Lebanese.9 journalists were reported injured.3 journalists were reported missing.13 journalists were reported arrested.
The deaths include Bilal Jadallah,  director of Press House-Palestine , a non-profit which supports the development of independent Palestinian media. He was killed in his car in Gaza in an Israeli airstrike on Sunday, according to the Palestinian Journalists’ Syndicate , Al Qahera News , and the Cairo-based Youm7. 
block-time published-time 2.38pm GMT 
The communal dining hall in Kibbutz Be’eri – which was devastated during the 7 October Hamas assault  – has reopened for the first time, according to Israeli broadcaster, Kann.
iwrtl???? 45 ????: ??? ????? ?? ????? ???? ???? ???? @Itsik_zuarets pic.twitter.com/WLMqqjDigm
 — ??? ????? (@kann_news) November 20, 2023
block-time published-time 2.18pm GMT 
Here are more details on the Jordanian field hospital that is being set up in the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis, according to the AFP news agency:
The field hospital has a 41-bed capacity, the Jordanian Royal Palace said.Aed Yaghi, head of medical aid in Gaza, said it was accompanied by 170 personnel and 40 trucks of medical aid.Mohammed Zaqout, director-general of Gaza hospitals, said the field hospital would help ease the pressure on existing health services, but added: “The number of medical personnel is limited and there aren’t (enough) ambulances.”He said hospitals in the area were experiencing “catastrophic” conditions and could no longer accept women who needed to give birth by caesarean section.Palestinian medics hope field hospitals sent by the United Arab Emirates and Qatar will soon follow.
Israel imposed what it calls a “complete siege” on Gaza during the war, but has recently accepted the delivery of limited supplies via the Gaza border crossing with Egypt.
Cairo, a US ally, has a peace treaty with Israel and the two countries have maintained a blockade on Gaza for years.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.52pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.54pm GMT 
 Some of the families of those believed to be held hostage by Hamas in Gaza have been speaking in a press conference at the Israeli embassy in London. 
Iris Haim spoke about her 28-year-old son Yotam. She said:
We are really worried. As a mother I cannot explain what I feel that my son is not with me. This evil isn’t against Jewish people but it’s against the world. It starts in Israel but it will continue to harm every person in the free world if you do not open your eyes. It is monsters against children.
She told the media: “We lost contact with him at 10.44am that day, and since then we only have the basic clues that he is in Gaza now. He left his room healthy and not wounded, which gave us little comfort. But he has a chronic disease, he needs a vaccine every month.”
    Family members of Israeli hostages who are believed held in Gaza, at a press conference at the Israel embassy in London (left to right): Iris Haim, the mother of Yotam Haim; Doron Libshtein, whose brother Ofir was among four members of his family killed by Hamas; Thomas Hand, the father of nine-year-old Irish-Israeli child Emily Hand; and Orit Meir the mother of Almog Meir Jan. Photograph: Victoria Jones/PA    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 2.54pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.38pm GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    An Israeli medevac helicopter transporting wounded soldiers takes off from an area in southern Israel near the border with the Gaza Strip. Photograph: John MacDougall/AFP/Getty Images      An aid convoy transporting a Jordanian field hospital is seen parked upon arrival in Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images      Palestinians look at the building of the Darwesh family, killed in the Israeli bombardment of the Gaza Strip, in Nuseirat refugee camp, central Gaza. Photograph: Adel Hana/AP      Family and friends mourn during a funeral for Adir Portugal in Mazkeret Batya, Israel. Photograph: Amir Levy/Getty Images    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.00pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.30pm GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
It is 3.30pm in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the latest headlines …
28 premature Palestinian babies that had been evacuated from the al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza have been transported via the Rafah border crossing into Egypt where they will receive further medial aid. Three babies remained in Gaza, two reportedly because of family personal circumstances, and one because their family has not been identified. The move was coordinated by the Palestine Red Crescent Society with the World Health Organization and the UN office for the coordination of humanitarian affairs (OCHA).There are reports of heavy fighting around the Indonesian hospital in the north of the Gaza Strip.  Marwan Abdallah, a medical worker there, said Israeli tanks were visible from the windows. “You can see them moving around and firing,” he told AP. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire.” Health ministry officials in Gaza say 12 people have been killed, including doctors and patients. The claims have not been independently verified.Indonesia’s foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, on Monday condemned Israel’s reported attack on the Indonesian hospital in Gaza.  “The attack is a clear violation of international humanitarian laws. All countries, especially those that have close relations with Israel, must use all their influence and capabilities to urge Israel to stop its atrocities,” she said in a statementDozens of trucks entered the Gaza  Strip from Egypt on with equipment from Jordan to set up a field hospital. Jordan’s state-run media said the hospital in the southern town of Khan Younis would be up and running within 48 hours.Relatives of some of the estimated 240 people held by Hamas in Gaza urged far-right Israeli lawmakers on Monday not to pursue proposed capital punishment for captured Palestinian militants, saying that even talk of doing so might endanger the hostages. Yarden Gonen, whose sister Romi is among the hostages, told national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, and his party colleagues during a parliamentary panel: “It would mean playing along with their mind games. And in return we would get pictures of our loves ones murdered, ended, with the state of Israel and not them [Hamas] being blamed for it. Don’t pursue this until after they are back here. Don’t put my sister’s blood on your hands.”Israel’s Haaretz says it has been told by a source “involved in the negotiations with Hamas” that the organisation is considering increasing the number of hostages it is willing to release.  The newspaper says the source told it that talks were in continuation and that more patience was needed.Israel’s military has released security camera footage it says shows hostages being brought into al-Shifa hospital  in Gaza City on 7 October after being kidnapped during Hamas’s attacks on southern Israel.  The first clip shows a man in shorts and a pale blue shirt being dragged through what looks like an entrance hall by five men. In the second, an injured man in underwear is wheeled in on a gurney by seven men. It has not been possible to verify the footage independently.Israel’s military has named two more soldiers killed in its campaign against Hamas. It stated that Eitan Dishon and Yanon Tamir were killed during action in the northern Gaza Strip today. The IDF now says it has lost 66 soldiers in total during the war since 7 October. At least 13,000 Palestinians have been killed and 30,000 injured by Israeli strikes across Gaza  since 7 October, the Hamas-run Gaza health ministry said on Sunday.Iran on Monday dismissed as “invalid” Israel’s accusations that Yemen’s Houthi rebels were acting on Tehran’s guidance, after the rebels said they had seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea.  Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship and described the incident as an “Iranian act of terrorism” with consequences for international maritime security.Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov will host a meeting in Moscow on Tuesday to discuss the situation in Gaza  with foreign ministers from members of the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic cooperation.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 3.44pm GMT
block-time published-time 1.23pm GMT 
 The World Health Organization has confirmed that the 28 premature babies evacuated from the al-Shifa hospital have arrived safely in Egypt. 
In a statement emailed to Reuters, it said “The 28 babies have now safely arrived in Egypt. Three babies still remain at the Emarati hospital [in Gaza] and continue to receive treatment. All babies are fighting serious infections and continue needing health care.”
    A nurse prepares premature babies for transport to Egypt. Photograph: Fatima Shbair/AP      
block-time published-time 12.54pm GMT 
 The IDF has issued an update on the tense situation that continues on Israel’s boundary with Lebanon. 
In a message posted to Telegram, Israel’s military said:
Earlier today, a terrorist cell attempted to launch anti-tank missiles in the area of Marwahin in Lebanon. The IDF struck the cell. Additionally, in response to the launches toward Israeli territory earlier today, IDF tanks, a fighter jet, and a helicopter struck Hezbollah terror infrastructure in Lebanon.
Furthermore, 25 launches were identified from Lebanon toward several locations adjacent to the border. The IDF Aerial Defence Array intercepted a number of the launches and the rest fell in open areas. Moreover, three UAVs were identified striking adjacent to an IDF post. No injuries were reported. The IDF struck the sources of the launches.
The claims have not been independently verified.
Earlier, Israeli journalist Fadi Amun posted a video which he said showed “An IDF post in the north that was hit by Hezbollah rocket fire this morning”. He added that the videos had been cleared for release by the authorities.
iwrtl???? ???? ????? ????? ???? ???? ?? ???????? ?????. *???????? ???? ????? ???????. ????? 1 pic.twitter.com/9q6fplvPkB
 — Fadi Amun | ???? ???? | ???? ???? (@FadiAmun) November 20, 2023
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 1.19pm GMT
block-time published-time 12.49pm GMT 
The Palestine Red Crescent Society has issued an Arabic-language video on social media which shows the transportation of 28 premature babies from Gaza into Egypt for medical aid. The babies, along with three others who have remained in Gaza, were evacuated from the al-Shifa hospital.
arrtl???? ?????? ???? ??? ???? ?? ???? ???? ??? ?????? ?? ????? ????? ?? ?? ????? ?? ??????? ?????? ??? ??????? ???????. #??? #Gaza pic.twitter.com/MTxKpIY5mo
 — PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 20, 2023
block-time published-time 12.46pm GMT 
If you haven’t seen it yet, here is the video footage released by Israel which it claims shows foreign hostages inside al-Shifa hospital   in Gaza.
block-time published-time 12.43pm GMT 
AP reports that dozens of trucks entered the Gaza Strip from Egypt on Monday with equipment from Jordan to set up a field hospital. Jordan’s state-run media said the hospital in the southern town of Khan Younis would be up and running within 48 hours.
    An aid convoy transporting a Jordanian field hospital enters the Gaza Strip through the Rafah crossing. Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 12.38pm GMT 
Ziad, a 35-year-old Palestinian in Gaza, has been writing a diary for the Guardian during Israel’s campaign against Hamas. Here is an excerpt from today:
Every morning, thousands of people are in the streets looking for what they need: food, medicine, blankets, heavy clothes. I saw a mother screaming at her young son in the middle of the street. It turned out that he got distracted and she had been looking for him for almost an hour.
“How would I find you if you got lost?” she screamed. Other women were calming her down.
These days we hear many stories about parents who lost their children, whether while fleeing or in public places. Most of the evacuating people are in these new areas for the first time, they may have passed by them before, or visited, but knowing the area is really difficult when most people have lost their ability to focus due to fear, stress or lack of sleep.
I remember talking to my friend who had a new baby girl months ago. “I know this will sound scary, but please, write on your daughter’s body all the identification information in marker, just in case,” I said. He was silent for a second, then he told me that he agreed with me.
I have witnessed several times the same situation, a group of boys go out to play with a ball, and the parents, usually fathers, would go out angry and tell them to get back inside. “If a bombing happens now, what will happen to you?! Go inside, immediately.”
 Read more of Ziad’s diary from Gaza here: Gaza diary part 23 – ‘Really? The whole world is unable to solve this situation and you think we know the answer?’
 Related:  Gaza diary part 23: ‘Really? The whole world is unable to solve this situation and you think we know the answer?’
block-time published-time 12.32pm GMT 
Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov will host a meeting in Moscow on Tuesday to discuss the situation in Gaza with foreign ministers from members of the Arab League and the Organisation of Islamic cooperation, Reuters reports, citing the RIA news agency.
block-time published-time 12.19pm GMT 
 A powerful rightwing pressure group, the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), is engineering pledges of unconditional support for Israel’s attack on Gaza by state legislatures across the US. 
Alec is promoting a model resolution  expressing “support for Israel’s right to pursue without interference or condemnation the elimination of Hamas”. A version has been accepted by legislatures in at least eight states, including Pennsylvania, Nebraska and North Dakota.
The resolution adopts Israeli claims that Hamas  uses “civilians as human shields” and names Iran as giving logistical support to the group.
Some state legislatures have also denounced calls for a ceasefire in Israel’s assault on Gaza.  Although state legislatures have limited direct influence over Washington’s policy on Israel, Alec and allied groups have long been instrumental in mobilising political pressure by pushing local legislation and resolutions in support of the Jewish state. They include laws to block and punish  support for the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) movement against Israel’s oppression of the Palestinians.
 Read more of Chris McGreal’s report here: Rightwing group pressures states to pass pro-Israel resolutions
 Related:  Rightwing group pressures states to pass pro-Israel resolutions
block-time published-time 12.10pm GMT 
 28 premature babies evacuated from Gaza into Egypt – reports  
A picture has been issued showing the ambulances carrying premature Palestinian babies who have been evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in the process of crossing into Egypt via the Rafah border crossing.
    Palestinian Red Crescent ambulances transporting premature babies await passage through the Rafah crossing. Photograph: Mohammed Abed/AFP/Getty Images   
Egypt’s Qahera news channel appears to have shown four ambulances on the Egyptian side of the border.
The Palestine Red Crescent Society had earlier posted images of the babies being prepared for transportation.
enltr?? A few moments ago, the Palestine Red Crescent ambulance teams departed from in front of the Emirati Hospital in Rafah to transport 28 premature infants to the Rafah Crossing, in preparation for their transfer to receive medical treatment in Egyptian hospitals. ??This comes… pic.twitter.com/PiXNuIAF2T
 — PRCS (@PalestineRCS) November 20, 2023
Thirty-one babies were evacuated from al-Shifa hospital. Reportedly three of the babies have remained in Gaza because the families of two of them want them to remain there for “personal reasons”, and because a third is unidentified. A medical spokesperson told the BBC that the babies remaining in Gaza were in a stable condition.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.15pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.40am GMT 
 Relatives of some of the estimated 240 people held by Hamas in Gaza urged far-right Israeli lawmakers on Monday not to pursue proposed capital punishment for captured Palestinian militants, saying that even talk of doing so might endanger the hostages. 
Israel’s justice ministry said on 7 November that a taskforce was discussing how to try the Palestinians who had been detained and secure “punishments befitting the severity of the horrors committed” for those convicted. The national security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, has called for the death penalty, which is dormant on Israel’s law books, Reuters reports.
Yarden Gonen, whose sister Romi is among the hostages, told Ben-Gvir and his party colleagues during a parliamentary panel: “It would mean playing along with their mind games. And in return we would get pictures of our loves ones murdered, ended, with the state of Israel and not them [Hamas] being blamed for it.
“Don’t pursue this until after they are back here. Don’t put my sister’s blood on your hands.”
Some of the relatives of the people held captive by Hamas in Gaza worry that the publicity around the capital punishment debate could invite reprisals even as hopes of a deal to free some of them is growing. A number of suspected Palestinian gunmen were detained in Israel after members of Hamas breached the Gaza Strip border on 7 October.
Gonen was one of the relatives of the hostages who took part in a five-day march from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem last week. She told the Guardian  on Saturday that the families felt neglected by the government. “We need to see that they’re doing everything in their power to get the hostages back home,” Yarden said. “And we’re not going to back down.”
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 12.17pm GMT
block-time published-time 11.32am GMT 
The BBC is reporting that only 28 of the 31 premature babies are being transferred because one baby has no identified parents to sign consent forms for the transfer, and that for “personal circumstances” two of the babies’ families preferred them to stay in Gaza.
Ethar Shalaby, of the BBC Arabic Service, spoke to Dr Mohamed Salama, the head of the neo-natal unit at al-Ahli Emirates hospital where the babies were being cared for. Salama said the three babies staying behind were in a stable condition.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.40am GMT
block-time published-time 11.27am GMT 
A picture has been issued of some of the premature babies being transported out of Gaza and into Egypt today. They are seen in the back of an ambulance.
    Premature babies who were evacuated from al-Shifa hospital lie in an ambulance in Rafah before they are transported for treatment. Photograph: Reuters   
Thirty-one premature babies were evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in northern Gaza after it was raided by Israeli forces. Twenty-eight of them are now in transit to the Rafah crossing, according to a statement earlier from the Palestine Red Crescent Society.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30am GMT
block-time published-time 11.23am GMT 
 Indonesia’s foreign minister, Retno Marsudi, on Monday condemned Israel’s reported attack on the Indonesian hospital in Gaza. 
“The attack is a clear violation of international humanitarian laws. All countries, especially those that have close relations with Israel, must use all their influence and capabilities to urge Israel to stop its atrocities,” she said in a statement, Reuters reports.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.30am GMT
block-time published-time 11.22am GMT 
The IDF reports on its Telegram channel that sirens are sounding in northern Israel. Earlier today Israel’s military said it had again exchanged fire with anti-Israeli forces on the Lebanese side of the blue line.
block-time published-time 11.21am GMT 
Al Jazeera reports that it has spoken to Munner al-Bursh, the general manager of the Hamas-run health ministry in Gaza, who gave it an outline of what he said was happening at the Indonesian hospital in north Gaza.
He told them that Israeli forces were continuing to attack the hospital, after an artillery barrage that started overnight. He claimed that some bodies of those killed during the attack were still lying on the ground outside the hospital, and that nobody had been able to reach them to bury them. He said the hospital was using a small power generator that runs on vegetable oil.
The claims have not been independently verified.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.31am GMT
block-time published-time 10.53am GMT 
 Israel’s military has named two more soldiers killed in its campaign against Hamas. It stated that Eitan Dishon and Yanon Tamir were killed during action in the northern Gaza Strip today.
The IDF now says it has lost 66 soldiers in total during the war since 7 October.
At least 13,000 Palestinians have been killed and 30,000 injured by Israeli strikes across Gaza since 7 October, Gaza’s health ministry said on Sunday.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.57am GMT
block-time published-time 10.47am GMT 
Here are some of the latest images sent to us over the news wires from Gaza and Israel.
    This picture taken from southern Israel near the border with Gaza shows smoke billowing over destroyed buildings. Photograph: John MacDougall/AFP/Getty Images      Displaced Palestinian walk among tents in a camp in Khan Younis in the southern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Ibraheem Abu Mustafa/Reuters      People help a man injured during an Israeli strike on Rafah in the southern Gaza Strip, one of the areas where Israel has ordered Palestinians to flee to for safety. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images      Israeli soldiers scan an area in the Zeitoun district inside Gaza. Photograph: Mahmud Hams/AFP/Getty Images      
block-time published-time 10.40am GMT 
 28 premature babies being moved to Rafah crossing  
 The Palestine Red Crescent Society has posted to social media to say 28 of the 31 premature babies evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in the north of Gaza are now being taken to the Rafah border crossing. 
In the statement, it said  :
A few moments ago, the Palestine Red Crescent ambulance teams departed from in front of the Emirati hospital in Rafah to transport 28 premature infants to the Rafah crossing, in preparation for their transfer to receive medical treatment in Egyptian hospitals. This comes in coordination with the World Health Organization and the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).
It is not clear at present whether the three other babies will also be moved.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.45am GMT
block-time published-time 10.09am GMT 
 Summary of the day so far …  
It has just gone noon in Gaza City and in Tel Aviv. Here are the latest headlines …
There are reports of heavy fighting around the Indonesian hospital in the north of the Gaza Strip.  Marwan Abdallah, a medical worker there, said Israeli tanks were visible from the windows. “You can see them moving around and firing,” he told AP. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire”. Health ministry officials in Gaza say 12 people have been killed, including doctors and patients. The claims have not been independently verified.Israel’s Haaretz says it has been told by a source “involved in the negotiations with Hamas” that the organisation is considering increasing the number of hostages it is willing to release.  The newspaper says the source told it that talks were in continuation and that more patience was needed.Israel’s military has released security camera footage it says shows hostages being brought into al-Shifa hospital  in Gaza City on 7 October after being kidnapped during Hamas’s attacks on southern Israel.  The first clip shows a man in shorts and a pale blue shirt being dragged through what looks like an entrance hall by five men. In the second, an injured man in underwear is wheeled in on a gurney by seven men. It has not been possible to verify the footage independently.Thirty-one premature babies evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City on Sunday. Health officials say they are in “extremely critical condition”.  The newborns had dehydration, hypothermia and sepsis in some cases, said Mohamed Zaqout, the director of Gaza hospitals. The babies are receiving urgent care in the southern Gaza city of Rafah, and preparations are in hand for them to be taken to Egypt.Arab and Muslim ministers called on Monday for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, as their delegation visited Beijing on the first leg of a tour to push for an end to hostilities and to allow humanitarian aid into the territory.  The delegation, which is due to meet officials representing the permanent members of the UN security council, is also piling pressure on the west to reject Israel’s justification of its actions against Palestinians as self-defence.Iran on Monday dismissed as “invalid” Israel’s accusations that Yemen’s Houthi rebels were acting on Tehran’s guidance, after the rebels said they had seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea.  Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship and described the incident as an “Iranian act of terrorism” with consequences for international maritime security.The Israeli military has issued a statement to say there have been further exchanges of fire across the UN-drawn blue line that marks the border between Israel and Lebanon.More than 100 evacuees from Gaza are due to arrive in Turkey on Monday, including dozens of people who will receive medical treatment there, Turkey’s health minister and a foreign ministry source have told Reuters.Australia ’s foreign minister, Penny Wong, has posted to social media to say 31 people, including Australian citizens, left Gaza via the Rafah crossing earlier today.
This is Martin Belam on the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.36am GMT
block-time published-time 9.57am GMT 
Al Jazeera has carried some updates from reporters it has on the ground in Gaza.
Hisham Zaqout reports that Israeli airstrikes targeted a house in Rafah, where many were killed and injured, and that Israeli tanks and vehicles moved from Beit Hanoon to the Indonesian hospital.
Meanwhile, from Khan Younis, Tareq Abu Azzoum has reported that “the situation on the ground for civilians and the humanitarian conditions have been exacerbated” by rain, noting that “the rain is expected to continue with a noticeable temperature drop in the coming weeks”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 10.05am GMT
block-time published-time 9.20am GMT 
 Iran on Monday dismissed as “invalid” Israel’s accusations that Yemen’s Houthi rebels were acting on Tehran’s  guidance  when they seized a Red Sea ship  owned by an Israeli businessman. 
Iran’s foreign ministry spokesperson Nasser Kanani said the Israeli accusations were “invalid” and a “projection meant to escape from the situation they are facing”, AFP reports.
“We have repeatedly announced that the resistance groups in the region represent their countries and make decisions and act based on the interests of their countries,” he said.
The office of the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, had said the ship “was hijacked with Iran guidance by the Yemenite Houthi militia”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.22am GMT
block-time published-time 9.01am GMT 
 The Israeli military has issued a statement to say there have been further exchanges of fire across the UN-drawn blue line that marks the border between Israel and Lebanon. 
In a message on the Telegram app, the IDF said:
This morning, IDF artillery struck in several locations in Lebanon. A number of launches were then identified from Lebanon into Israeli territory. No injuries were reported. As a result of the launches toward the area of Biranit, a fire broke out. IDF and Israel fire and rescue services are at the scene. The IDF also struck the sources of the launches.
The claims have not been independently verified.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 9.04am GMT
block-time published-time 8.23am GMT 
In the UK, Sky News international affairs editor Dominic Waghorn has had this to say about talks over a hostage deal, telling viewers:
There still seems to be differences about the number of hostages, but also the logistics of how they are found in the various bits of Gaza and how they are brought in.
The deal is still thought to be focused on the women and children. Israel wants all women and children [hostages] out of Gaza and in return it is prepared to hand over a greater number of Palestinian women and children they are holding in their jails.
There is still hesitation among some in the Israeli government. They believe they are still pressing home an advantage against Hamas and will worry about the chances of their enemy regrouping.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.25am GMT
block-time published-time 8.20am GMT 
 AP reports “heavy fighting” around the Indonesian hospital in the north of the Gaza Strip. It quotes Marwan Abdallah, a medical worker there, as saying Israeli tanks were visible from the windows. 
“You can see them moving around and firing,” he told the news agency. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire.”
Abdallah said the hospital had received dozens of dead and wounded in airstrikes and shelling overnight. He said medical staff and displaced people feared Israel would besiege the hospital and force its evacuation.
The claims have not been independently verified.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.25am GMT
block-time published-time 8.07am GMT 
 Israel’s Haaretz  says it has been told by a source “involved in the negotiations with Hamas” that the organisation is considering increasing the number of hostages it is willing to release. 
The newspaper says the source told it that talks were in continuation, and says “indirect contacts between Israel and Hamas have already collapsed twice” and that more patience is needed.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.17am GMT
block-time published-time 8.01am GMT 
 Al Jazeera is reporting that the Indonesian hospital in northern Gaza has come under Israeli attack. It quotes health ministry officials in Gaza as saying that the death toll is 12, and that those killed include doctors and patients. 
Ashraf al-Qudra, a spokesperson for the Hamas-run health ministry, described the situation to Al Jazeera as “catastrophic”. He claimed there were about 700 people inside the hospital, including medical staff and the injured.
It has not been possible for journalists to independently verify the claims.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.04am GMT
block-time published-time 7.54am GMT 
 More than 100 evacuees from Gaza are set to arrive in Turkey on Monday, including dozens of people who will receive medical treatment there, Turkey’s health minister and a foreign ministry source have told Reuters. 
Sixty-one patients, accompanied by about 49 relatives, arrived in Egypt from Gaza on Sunday evening and were scheduled to fly to Ankara on Monday morning after spending the night in a hospital, the health minister Fahrettin Koca said.
He said last week that Ankara wanted to bring as many of the nearly 1,000 cancer patients from Gaza to Turkey as possible. The first 27 patients arrived in Ankara last Thursday.
Separately, a group of 87 people, consisting of Turks, Turkish Cypriots and their relatives, arrived in Egypt from Gaza on Sunday and were due to fly to Istanbul on Monday evening, a foreign ministry source said.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 8.01am GMT
block-time published-time 7.22am GMT 
 Australia’s foreign minister, Penny Wong, has posted to social media to say 31 people, including Australian citizens, left Gaza via the Rafah crossing earlier today. 
In her message, she said: “They are being supported by our consular staff in Egypt. The Australian government has facilitated the departure of a total of 62 people from Gaza. We are working with partners as part of international efforts to allow for the safe passage of foreign nationals from Gaza.”
Wong added: “Australia has been clear in our calls for safe, sustained and immediate humanitarian access so essential assistance can reach people in need and civilians can reach safety. We all want to take the next steps towards a ceasefire, but it cannot be one-sided.”
enltr31 people including Australian citizens, permanent residents and family members left Gaza via the Rafah crossing this morning. They are being supported by our consular staff in Egypt. The Australian Government has facilitated the departure of a total of 62 people from Gaza. pic.twitter.com/2yWqzmwgCv
 — Senator Penny Wong (@SenatorWong) November 20, 2023 This is Martin Belam taking over the live blog in London. You can contact me at martin.belam@theguardian.com. 
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.24am GMT
block-time published-time 7.19am GMT 
Our First Edition newsletter today features Archie Bland speaking to Kaamil Ahmed, a reporter on the Guardian’s global development desk, who has been using his contacts in Gaza to tell of the plight experienced by those on the ground:
As Kaamil has heard these stories, he’s been struck by the impossibility for the residents of Gaza of looking beyond their most immediate needs. “Every day is a new battle,” he said. “To find water, to find bread, to charge phones. It takes hours to get to a market, because there’s no fuel for cars. It takes hours to queue for supplies or to use the bathroom, and you can’t cook more food than you need for the next day, because you don’t have a fridge. It doesn’t matter who you are, or who you were before this: everything takes a long time, and there’s nothing to spend your money on. The cycle starts again constantly, for everyone.”
Most people Kaamil speaks to have loved ones who’ve been killed since the war began. That is the context for how they perceive Israel’s campaign: “I hear the word genocide a lot more now,” Kaamil said. “That is a very complicated and contested term, but it’s what people there feel.”
Because of the unique misfortune of their geopolitical circumstances, people in Gaza are quite often treated as if they see everything through a political lens; an answer to whether they support Hamas, even before 7 October, was far more likely to be how they would be heard by the wider world than the equivalent question to somebody living in Europe or the US.
“But if you ask somebody a question like that, it doesn’t mean they were thinking about it before you asked them,” Kaamil said. “My experience of Gaza is as a place full of people finding creative ways to get by, and to enjoy their lives. I don’t know anybody who visited Gaza who didn’t enjoy it, and find it, despite everything, actually a nice place to be. That’s part of why it feels so important to show how people are surviving, or trying to survive, now.”
 Read more here: Monday briefing – the Palestinians determined to get the word out on life inside Gaza
 Related:  Monday briefing: The Palestinians determined to get the word out on life inside Gaza
Sign up here for our daily newsletter, First Edition
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.23am GMT
block-time published-time 6.57am GMT 
In an update on the 31 premature babies evacuated from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City on Sunday, health officials say they are in “extremely critical condition”.
The newborns had dehydration, hypothermia and sepsis in some cases, said Mohamed Zaqout, the director of Gaza hospitals.
Four other babies died in the two days before the evacuation, Associated Press quoted him as also saying.
The babies from the hospital, where power was cut and supplies ran out while Israeli forces battled Palestinian militants outside, were receiving urgent care in the southern Gaza city of Rafah.
    Palestinian medics care for babies evacuated from al-Shifa hospital to the Emirates hospital in Rafah, southern Gaza. Photograph: Ismail Muhammad/UPI/Shutterstock   
Zaqout said preparations were under way for them to enter Egypt.
A World Health Organization team that visited al-Shifa hospital said most of the remaining patients had amputations, burns or other trauma. Plans were being made to evacuate them in the coming days.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.06am GMT
block-time published-time 6.29am GMT 
We’ve published a full report on the Israeli military releasing video footage that it says shows hostages being taken into Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital on 7 October, the day Hamas launched its devastating attacks on Israel.
The CCTV video aired by an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) spokesperson appeared to show a group of men frog-marching an individual into a hospital, to the surprise of medical staff. A second clip showed an injured man on a gurney. Another man nearby, in civilian clothes, had an assault rifle.
Separately, the IDF claimed one hostage, a 19-year-old Israeli army conscript named Noa Marciano, had been killed by Hamas at the hospital.
Hamas has previously blamed an Israeli airstrike for her death.
The Hamas-run health ministry in Gaza said it was not able to confirm the authenticity of the footage of the two hostages aired by the IDF, according to the BBC. Hamas’s leadership did not immediately comment on the claims. It has previously said it took some hostages to hospitals for treatment.
Our full report is here:
 Related:  Israeli military says footage shows foreign hostages being taken inside Gaza’s al-Shifa hospital
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 7.03am GMT
block-time published-time 6.19am GMT 
 Israel 'expanding' operation in Gaza, says military  
The Israeli military said it was expanding its operation in the Gaza Strip, Agence France-Presse is reporting.
Israel warned residents of Gaza’s largest refugee camp, Jabaliya, and a nearby coastal camp to evacuate, while the military said on Sunday it was “expanding its operational activities in additional neighbourhoods” of Gaza.
After intense bombardment, an AFP journalist in the territory saw columns of smoke rising from Jabaliya, in northern Gaza, on Sunday.
A Hamas health official said more than 80 people were killed in twin strikes on Jabaliya on Saturday, including on a UN school sheltering displaced people.
Social media videos verified by AFP showed bodies covered in blood and dust on the floor of a building, where mattresses had been wedged under school tables.
    Palestinians search for casualties at the site of Israeli strikes on homes in the Jabaliya refugee camp in the northern Gaza Strip. Photograph: Reuters   
Israel’s military has said Jabaliya is among the areas of focus as troops “target terrorists and strike Hamas infrastructure”.
Without mentioning the strikes, the Israeli army said that “an incident in the Jabaliya region” was under review.
The UN rights chief, Volker Turk, on Sunday condemned the purported strike on the school as “horrifying”, adding that “the horrendous events of the past 48 hours in Gaza beggar belief”.
On Monday, Palestinian news agency Wafa said the Indonesian hospital near Jabaliya had also come under shelling.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 11.06am GMT
block-time published-time 5.55am GMT 
Reuters has posted a video report on belongings left behind after Hamas’s attack on a music festival in southern Israel on 7 October.
The post on X (formerly Twitter) says that at a trauma centre in the Israeli city of Caesarea, “survivors reclaimed their lost possessions, while families of the dead reunited with the things their loved ones left behind”.
enltrThese are the belongings left behind after Hamas attacked a music festival in southern Israel. At a trauma center in the city of Caesarea, survivors reclaimed their lost possessions, while families of the dead reunited with the things their loved ones left behind pic.twitter.com/0VbIwRtMhZ
 — Reuters (@Reuters) November 20, 2023
An Israeli police investigation into the attack on the Supernova music festival in Kibbutz Re’im on 7 October updated the death toll to 364, according to Israeli media reports last week.
That figure would make up nearly a third of all of those killed during the onslaught in Israel on 7 October, the Times of Israel reported, citing Channel 12.
Earlier counts had placed the death count from the festival attack at 270.
The Israeli police reportedly believe that Hamas  did not know about the festival before carrying out the attacks.
Here’s our explainer from last month on the assault:
 Related:  How the Hamas attack on the Supernova festival in Israel unfolded
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.09am GMT
block-time published-time 5.29am GMT 
Iran’s supreme leader says Israel has suffered a “defeat” in its war against Iran-backed Hamas and that it is “a fact”.
In a speech at an Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps aerospace force centre in the capital of Tehran, quoted by Agence France-Presse, Khamenei said that “the defeat of the Zionist regime [Israel] in Gaza is a fact”.
Advancing and entering hospitals or people’s homes is not a victory, because victory means defeating the other side.
Khamenei said Israel “has so far failed” in achieving its declared goal of destroying Hamas “despite the massive bombings” of Gaza.
“This incapacity reflects the inability of the United States and western countries” which back Israel, he added.
Iran, which supports Hamas financially and militarily, has called the 7 October attacks a “success” but denied any direct involvement.
block-time published-time 5.15am GMT 
We’ve just published a full report on Yemen’s Houthi rebels saying they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warning that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.
Houthi forces would “continue to carry out military operations against the Israeli enemy until the aggression against Gaza stops and the ugly crimes … against our Palestinian brothers in Gaza and the West Bank stop”, a spokesperson for the group, Yahya Saree, said on X (formerly Twitter).
Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship and described the incident as an “Iranian act of terrorism” with consequences for international maritime security.
Here’s the full report:
 Related:  Yemen’s Houthi rebels seize cargo ship in Red Sea, calling Israeli vessels ‘legitimate targets’
     The Galaxy Leader in a Slovenian port in 2008. Photograph: Kristijan Bracun/AP    
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 5.17am GMT
block-time published-time 5.05am GMT 
 World must act urgently to end 'humanitarian disaster' in Gaza, says China  
The international community must take urgent action to stop the “humanitarian disaster” unfolding in Gaza, Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi has told visiting diplomats from Arab and Muslim-majority nations.
“Let us work together to quickly cool down the situation in Gaza and restore peace in the Middle East as soon as possible,” Wang told foreign ministers in opening remarks in Beijing on Monday, Agence France-Presse reports.
“A humanitarian disaster is unfolding in Gaza,” Wang told the delegates, including the secretary general of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.
A delegation of foreign ministers of the Palestinian Authority, Indonesia, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan are in Beijing this week for talks aimed at a “de-escalation” of the current Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
    Smoke rises above buildings during an Israeli strike on the Gaza Strip on Friday, viewed from southern Israel.  Photograph: Kenzo Tribouillard/AFP/Getty Images   
Wang said:
The situation in Gaza affects all countries around the world, questioning the human sense of right and wrong and humanity’s bottom line.
Wang also said China fully supported the call for a two-state solution in Gaza by the recent Islamic-Arab summit in Riyadh.
Saudi Arabia’s foreign minister, Faisal bin Farhan al Saud, said the international community needed to shoulder responsibility to stop Israel.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.05am GMT
block-time published-time 4.52am GMT 
 Arab and Muslim ministers call for immediate Gaza ceasefire at China meeting  
Arab and Muslim ministers called on Monday for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, as their delegation visited Beijing on the first leg of a tour to push for an end to hostilities and to allow humanitarian aid into the territory.
Reuters reports that the delegation, which is set to meet officials representing the permanent members of the UN security council, is also piling pressure on the west to reject Israel’s justification of its actions against Palestinians as self-defence.
The officials holding meetings with China’s top diplomat, Wang Yi, on Monday are from Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt, Indonesia, Palestine and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, among others.
The extraordinary joint Islamic-Arab summit in Riyadh this month also urged the international criminal court to investigate “war crimes and crimes against humanity that Israel is committing” in the Palestinian territories.
Saudi Arabia has sought to press the US and Israel for an end to hostilities in Gaza, and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, the kingdom’s de facto ruler, gathered Arab and Muslim leaders to reinforce that message.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 6.04am GMT
block-time published-time 4.44am GMT 
Here are some recent images from the Gaza Strip, this time of the funeral of freelance journalists Hassouna Sleem and Sary Mansour.
The two were killed on Saturday in an Israeli assault on Bureij refugee camp, in the centre of the Gaza Strip, their relatives and Palestinian health officials said.
Health officials said 17 people died in the attack.
block-time published-time 4.26am GMT 
 Opening summary  
Hello and welcome to the Guardian’s continuing live coverage of the Israel-Hamas war with me, Adam Fulton.
Israel’s military has released security camera footage it says shows hostages being brought into the al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City on 7 October after being kidnapped during Hamas’s attacks on southern Israel. 
The first clip, which appears to be time-stamped 10.53am on 7 October, shows a man in shorts and a pale blue shirt being dragged through what looks like an entrance hall by five men, at least three of whom are armed.
In the second, seemingly time-stamped 10.55am, an injured man in underwear is wheeled in on a gurney by seven men – at least four of them armed – as several men in blue hospital scrubs look on.
It was not possible to verify the footage independently. More on that soon.
    Security camera footage released by the Israeli army showing what it says is Hamas fighters leading hostages into al-Shifa hospital on 7 October. Photograph: Israeli army/AFP/Getty Images   
In other key developments as it approaches 6.30am in Gaza City and Tel Aviv:
Palestinian medics have evacuated 31 premature babies  from al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City and taken them to a hospital in southern Gaza for assessment and treatment, the World Health Organisation has said. Doctors found that “all the babies are fighting serious infections due to lack of medical supplies and impossibility to continue infection control measures in al-Shifa hospital”, it said. Preparations were under way for the babies to enter Egypt, said the director general of hospitals in Gaza, Mohammed Zaqut.Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal  that would see the release of a significant number of hostages, possibly in return for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, all suggested an agreement was close on Sunday, although observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse.A senior Israeli source and a senior member of Hamas rejected a report quoting an unnamed Hamas source as saying an agreement was reached on Sunday to start a ceasefire on Monday and release a number of hostages, according to a report  in the Jerusalem Post.Japan’s top government spokesperson says the country is appealing to Yemen’s Houthis  who have captured a cargo ship in the southern Red Sea and is seeking the help of Saudi, Omani and Iranian authorities to work towards the swift release of the vessel and its crew. Twenty-two crew were onboard, including Bulgarians and Filipinos, Japan’s Nikkei newspaper said.The Israel military has published video footage it says shows the first solid evidence  of a sophisticated Hamas tunnel network underneath the al-Shifa hospital complex. It said on Sunday that its troops “exposed a 55-metre-long terror tunnel 10 metres deep” under the hospital complex. Hamas dismissed Israel’s claim, while the director of the Gaza health ministry, Mounir el-Boursh, reportedly called it “pure lie”.At least 13,000 Palestinians have been killed and 30,000 injured by Israeli strikes across Gaza since 7 October, Gaza’s health ministry said on Sunday. Nearly 884,000 internally displaced persons  were sheltering in 154 installations in Gaza run by the UN agency for Palestinian refugees, the agency said.    People wait for food relief in the southern Gaza city of Rafah on Sunday. Photograph: Xinhua/Shutterstock   France will send a warship to provide medical aid to Gaza, President Emmanuel Macron has said.The head of a prominent media institution in the Gaza Strip and two other journalists were killed  over the weekend in Israel’s offensive in the territory, their relatives have said. The New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists said the weekend deaths raised to 48 the number of journalists and media workers it had confirmed killed in the region since 7 October.The World Health Organisation, which led a second assessment visit to al-Shifa hospital on Sunday, commended the healthcare personnel  working at the facility, which the WHO declared to be a “death zone”.
block-time updated-timeUpdated at 4.51am GMT

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




IDF closes in on Indonesian hospital in Gaza as 12 people reportedly killed
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:10 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:7
Length: 814 words
Byline: Dan Sabbagh in Jerusalem
Highlight: Medical worker says ‘women and children are terrified’ amid fears of repeat of events at al-Shifa hospital complexIsrael-Hamas war: live updates
Body


A dozen people reportedly have been killed at another major medical facility in northern Gaza as Israeli forces close in on the packed Indonesian hospital despite hopes that a ceasefire-for-hostages deal may be agreed.
Video broadcast on  Al Jazeera TV on Monday showed damage to what were described as patient facilities, while daytime footage on social media appeared to show Israeli tanks close to the medical complex.
One medical worker, Marwan Abdallah, said the tanks were clearly visible from the hospital windows. “Women and children are terrified. There are constant sounds of explosions and gunfire,” he said.
The ministry of health in Gaza said it believed 12 people had been killed in shelling overnight and that it feared a repeat of what happened at al-Shifa hospital complex , which was surrounded and raided by Israeli forces last week.
There was no immediate comment from the Israel Defense Forces, although in the past  the Israeli military said it believed a Hamas tunnel entrance was near to the Indonesian hospital and that missiles were launched into Israel from nearby.
The ministry of health said 700 people, including medical staff, were crowded into the Indonesian hospital, the last hospital operating in northern Gaza. Broadcast footage showed wounded people and sheltering civilians packed into its corridors, seeking treatment or safety from the fighting.
Efforts were being made to coordinate a rescue of patients with the Red Cross, the health ministry said, although it said it had received no commitments from Israel about allowing safe passage. Only 10 out of Gaza’s 36 hospitals remain open, the World Health Organization said on Monday. The Indonesian hospital was coming under “extreme pressure”, the WHO executive director Michael Ryan said.
Retno Marsudi, Indonesia’s foreign minister, said the attack on the hospital “was a clear violation of international humanitarian laws” and urged Israel’s allies to call on it to “stop its atrocities”. The hospital in the far north of the Gaza Strip was established with the help of donations from the south-east Asian country.
Separately, the medical charity Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) said a clinic it operated in Gaza City came under attack on Monday morning. Part of the building was engulfed in flames, it said, and four marked MSF cars were burned while a fifth was found crushed by a heavy vehicle or a tank. The charity said it was not immediately aware of the status of one member of staff and 20 family members.
Israel invaded Gaza at the end of October after a Hamas attack three weeks earlier that killed 1,200 people, most of them civilians. Israel responded with an almost immediate aerial bombardment of the densely populated strip, before launching the ground invasion. In total, more than 13,000 Palestinians have died.
An estimated 1.7 million Palestinians living in Gaza have also been displaced since the start of the war, according to figures from UN agency for Palestinian refugees (UNRWA) released on Monday. The population of the strip was estimated at 2.3 million before Hamas’s 7 October attack on Israel. 
There have been hopes that Israel and Hamas may be edging towards a deal  in talks brokered by Qatar that would lead to the release of a significant number of the 240 hostages  held by Hamas, possibly in return for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails.
Senior US and Israeli officials and the Qatari prime minister all suggested that an agreement was close on Sunday, although observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse.
Relief trucks originally from Jordan entered Gaza from Egypt on Monday with the intention of setting up a new field hospital in the southern Gaza city of Khan Younis. Jordanian state media said it hoped the facility would help ease some of the humanitarian crisis as Israel’s forces seize medical facilities in the north.
In an effort coordinated by the Palestinian Red Crescent Society, 28 premature babies were rescued from Shifa hospital and taken to Egypt. Three babies remained in Gaza, two for family reasons and one because the family could not be identified.
The WHO said on Sunday that the hospital had become a “death zone” , with a mass grave at the entrance and only 25 staff left to care for 291 seriously ill patients, who it was feared were too ill to be moved despite the fighting.
Israel says Hamas runs operations from under Shifa, and on Sunday evening it released video footage that it said showed two hostages being taken into the facility on 7 October.
R Adm Daniel Hagari, a spokesperson for the military, released CCTV video that appeared to show two hostages, said to be a Nepali and a Thai man, entering the hospital. One of the two was clearly injured and was being carried on a hospital trolley.

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Hostages’ families clash with Israeli politicians over talk of death penalty
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:23 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 1084 words
Byline: Jason Burke in Jerusalem
Highlight: Far-right politicians want to execute militants convicted of 7 October attacks, but relatives say this risks lives of Gaza hostagesIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


Families of Israeli hostages held by Hamas have clashed with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Palestinian militants.
The families said on Monday that even talk of doing so might endanger the lives of their relatives. The row underlines the deep divisions in Israel over how to deal with the hostage crisis.
Reports have suggested that Israel and Hamas are edging towards a deal that would bring the release of a significant number of the more than 240 people seized by the extremist Islamist organisation during their attack in Israel last month, possibly in return for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails.
The US president, Joe Biden, said on Monday he believed a deal was near to secure the release of some of the hostages being held by Hamas, telling reporters: “I believe so,” when asked at the White House about a possible agreement.
Israeli officials have sent mixed messages, repeatedly denying suggestions by senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, that an agreement was close, but also hinting that progress was being made.
“I beg you not to capitalise on our suffering now … when the lives of our loved ones are at stake, when the sword is at their necks,” Gil Dickmann, whose cousin is a hostage, told Itamar Ben-Gvir,  Israel’s national security minister, according to Haaretz.
Yarden Gonen, whose sister Romi is among the hostages, told Ben-Gvir and his far-right party colleagues during a parliamentary panel that the proposal to introduce potential capital sentences for convicted militants would mean “playing along with [the] mind games” of Hamas.
“And in return we would get pictures of our loved ones murdered, ended, with the state of Israel and not them [Hamas] being blamed for it …. Don’t pursue this until after they are back here,” she said. “Don’t put my sister’s blood on your hands.”
When confronted by relatives of the hostages opposing such a change, far-right politicians shouted that they did not have “a monopoly of pain” in comments that appalled many Israelis.
As many as 300 Hamas militants are being held by Israel, military officials have said. Some were involved in the bloody attacks last month, which killed 1,200 people, mostly civilians in their homes or at a dance party.
The Qatari prime minister on Sunday said that only minor differences between Hamas and Israel remained to be resolved, but the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said no deal had been reached.
Netanyahu is under domestic pressure to free the hostages. The challenge of doing this while completing the goal of eliminating Hamas as a military force capable of striking Israel again has led to disagreements among Israeli policymakers and the security establishment, as well as society more broadly.
Senior military officers say the two objectives can be reconciled as military pressure on Hamas would lead to concessions over hostages. It is not clear that all Israeli cabinet ministers agree.
Israeli media have reported divisions  among senior ministers, with some favouring accepting the deal reportedly tabled by Qatar before international pressure or rising military casualties weaken Israel’s bargaining position. Others argue that Israel should hold out for better terms and that to accept those on offer would set a precedent for future negotiations to obtain the freedom of any remaining hostages.
US officials said a hostage deal appeared to be close, but also pointed out that it has appeared close for several days now. It was getting final agreement from the Israeli side, they said, that appeared to be the last hurdle.
The White House deputy national security adviser, Jon Finer, on Sunday said any deal to free “considerably more than 12” hostages would be likely to also include an extended pause in the fighting and allow for the distribution of humanitarian assistance in Gaza.
A staged release would be the first de-escalatory step since Hamas launched its assault on Israel on 7 October. So far, only four hostages have been released. It is thought 239 people from 26 different countries are still being held, including some dual nationals. One Israeli soldier was rescued early in the conflict.
Ben-Gvir’s proposal on capital punishment has moved slowly in parliament. The conservative Likud party of Netanyahu, which depends on support from far-right parties to remain in power, has shown little interest in advancing it during its long rule.
Israel’s justice ministry said earlier this month that officials were considering different procedures for putting suspected militants on trial and securing “punishments befitting the severity of the horrors committed”.
The hostages have already been threatened with execution by Hamas and are at risk of being hurt or killed in the military offensive launched by Israel. Israeli officials have said that two hostages were murdered by Hamas after being captured, citing forensic examination of their remains found by Israeli troops in northern Gaza.
The death penalty remains on Israel’s law books but the only ever court-ordered execution in Israel was that, in 1962, of Adolf Eichmann, a convicted Nazi war criminal who played a central role in the administration of the Holocaust.
Israeli military courts, which often handle cases involving Palestinians, have the power to hand down the death penalty by a unanimous decision of three judges, although this has never been implemented.
Hawkish politicians have, over the years, proposed making capital sentences easier to award, claiming executions deter terrorism.
Doing this was “more critical now than ever”, Ben-Gvir said, “first of all, for the sake of those murdered and who fell in the line of duty and, no less, so that there will be no more people kidnapped.”
Linor Dan-Calderon, three of whose relatives are hostages, accused Ben-Gvir’s party of having “confused priorities”.
“You’ve gotten mixed up, because we are a nation that pursues life, not one that pursues revenge – even if, in the past, we did something to Eichmann,” she said. “I am simply asking you to drop this from the agenda.”
Yair Lapid, the leader of the opposition, said the heated argument in parliament on Monday  was “shameful, a disgrace, and a terrible insult not only to the families of hostages but also to the entire state of Israel”.
Lapid said: “This is what happens when you take the craziest and most extreme people in the country and let them be in power.”

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Yemen’s Houthi rebels seize cargo ship in Red Sea and call Israeli vessels ‘legitimate targets’
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 5:04 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 726 words
Byline: Guardian staff and agencies
Highlight: Footage shows masked gunmen jumping on to Galaxy Leader, which Israel says is British-ownedSee all our Israel-Hamas war coverage
Body


Yemen’s Houthi rebels said they have seized what they called an Israeli cargo ship in the Red Sea, and warned that all vessels linked to Israel “will become a legitimate target for armed forces”.
Houthi forces would “continue to carry out military operations against the Israeli enemy until the aggression against Gaza stops and the ugly crimes … against our Palestinian brothers in Gaza and the West Bank stop”, said a spokesperson for the group, Yahya Saree, in a statement on X.
On Monday the rebels released a video purporting to show Sunday’s seizure.
The footage showed masked armed men jumping on to the ship from a helicopter while the vessel was still moving, and holding crew members at gunpoint. Palestinian and Yemeni flags were raised on board. It was not immediately possible to verify the clip.
Israel said the vessel was a British-owned and Japanese-operated cargo ship and described the incident as an “Iranian act of terrorism” with consequences for international maritime security.
Israel’s military, writing on X, said “the hijacking of a cargo ship by the Houthis near Yemen in the southern Red Sea is a very grave incident of global consequence”.
It said the ship had left Turkey headed for India, and was “staffed by civilians of various nationalities, not including Israelis”, adding: “It is not an Israeli ship.”
Iran’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Nasser Kanani, said the Israeli accusations were “invalid” and “projection meant to escape from the situation they are facing”.
“We have repeatedly announced that the resistance groups in the region represent their countries and make decisions and act based on the interests of their countries,” he said.
The Houthis have recently threatened to target Israeli vessels in the waterway over Israel’s war with Hamas in the Gaza Strip.
The Houthis, an ally of Tehran, have been launching long-range missile and drone salvoes at Israel  in solidarity with Hamas.
Japan’s top government spokesperson on Monday confirmed the capture of the Nippon Yusen-operated Galaxy Leader, adding that Japan was appealing to the Houthis while seeking the help of Saudi, Omani and Iranian authorities to work towards the swift release of the vessel and its crew.
“We strongly condemn such acts,” the chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, told a news conference. No Japanese nationals were among the crew, he said.
A US military official said the seizure of the vessel “is a flagrant violation of international law. We demand the immediate release of the ship and its crew. We will consult with our allies and UN partners as to appropriate next steps,” the official said.
The maritime security company Ambrey said the vessel’s group owner “is listed as Ray Car Carriers”, whose parent company belongs to Abraham “Rami” Ungar, an Israeli businessperson.
Ray Car Carriers and its parent company, Ray Shipping, could not be immediately reached for comment outside business hours.
Japan’s Nippon Yusen, also known as NYK, said the company had set up a taskforce to gather more information, including on the safety of the 25 crew, who were from the Philippines, Bulgaria, Ukraine, Romania and Mexico. The vessel, a car carrier, had been heading towards India from Europe with no cargo, a spokesperson said.
The Marine Traffic tracking site said the Galaxy Leader had “departed from Korfez, Turkey, and was on its way to Pipavav, India. Went offline on Saturday south-west of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.”
The office of the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said a ship – which it did not name – had been seized. There were no Israelis aboard and Israel was not involved in its ownership or operation, his office said.
“This is another Iranian act of terrorism that represents an escalation in Iran’s belligerence against the citizens of the free world, with concomitant international ramifications vis-a-vis the security of global shipping routes,” his office said.
On 14 November, the Houthi rebel leader, Abdul Malik al-Huthi, said the group was on the lookout for Israeli vessels in the commercially vital waters of the Red Sea – even those that did not have Israeli flags.
“Our eyes are open to constant monitoring and searching for any Israeli ship,” he said in a speech broadcast by the rebels’ Al-Masirah TV station.
                     Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this report                   

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Emily Hand’s father pleads for Hamas to release her amid hope of hostage deal
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:54 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: UK NEWS; Version:3
Length: 577 words
Byline: Geneva Abdul
Highlight: Thomas Hand said he will not believe in any deal between Israel and Hamas until he sees his daughter
Body


The father of a nine-year-old girl abducted by Hamas has again pleaded for her return amid growing hopes of a deal between Israel and Hamas  that would see a significant number of hostages released.
“That’d be very great for everyone concerned on both sides,” said Thomas Hand, 63. “It gives me hope, but until I see her, until I’m holding her I won’t believe anything. Until I see it, I won’t believe it.”
Six weeks after the Palestinian militant group’s deadly attack on 7 October, the parents of young hostages abducted by Hamas – Emily Hand, nine; Almog Meir Jan, 21; and Yotam Haim, 28 – pleaded for their return at a press conference in London, as they described their lives as a nightmare.
“I know the Israeli government and the army will do everything in their capabilities to get them back,” said Hand, whose daughter Emily was initially believed to be among the 1,200 Israelis killed during the surprise attack by Hamas in southern Israel. Now, she is counted among the 240 hostages in Gaza.
Hand said the day of Emily’s ninth birthday, 17 November, which he spent in Times Square surrounded by billboards with her image, was one of his darkest since the attack.
“My sole purpose in life now is to do everything I can to get my little daughter Emily back,” said Hand, who after living in Be’eri kibbutz for 20 years working in a printing house, now lives in a hotel near the Dead Sea. “Nothing else concerns me.”
The emotional plea comes amid the bloodiest chapter in the 75-year-old Israeli-Palestinian conflict, after Israel responded to the Hamas attack with an assault on Gaza that has killed more than 13,000 civilians.
On Monday, families in London echoed calls the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has faced from families  to bring the hostages home. Negotiations for their release are under way, possibly in return for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails.
Hamas has released four hostages, and has claimed that as many as 30 have been killed by the Israeli bombing of Gaza. On Sunday, Israel accused Hamas of executing a captive soldier and holding two foreign hostages at al-Shifa hospital, where last week the military said it recovered the body of 65-year-old Yehudit Weiss, a resident of the Be’eri kibbutz who was abducted by Hamas.
Sitting at a table before a backdrop displaying photographs of some of the 240 hostages, including a nine-month-old baby and young children, Iris Haim expressed support for the Israeli military while asking for the world’s support.
“We hope that they will come back, I trust Israel, I trust the IDF with all my heart but we need the support of the world,” said Haim, the mother of 28-year-old Yotam, who was abducted by Hamas from Kfar Aza. “We need you to support us please.”
After losing contact with her son at 10.44am on 7 October, Haim said the family have had few updates. She has found little comfort, she said, after learning he left his home healthy, walking and unwounded.
She added: “Many people want to live together, but we cannot, we cannot make peace with somebody that hates us, that wants to kill us and not just to kill but to slaughter, to be so cruel to innocent people.”
“In the long-term future, I would love to see peace with our neighbours,” Hand said told the Guardian. “We used to have peace with our neighbours. Before the first intifada, there was true peace. I just hope that they’re taking some reasonable care of Emily and the hostages.”

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Palestinian poet Mosab Abu Toha detained by Israelis in Gaza, family says
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 10:29 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:3
Length: 557 words
Byline: Julian Borger World affairs editor
Highlight: The American Book award winner was said to be heading south for the Rafah crossing when he was picked up at a checkpointIsrael-Hamas war – live updates
Body


A celebrated Palestinian poet and author, Mosab Abu Toha, has been detained by Israeli forces while trying to leave Gaza, according to his friends and family.
Abu Toha had been told by US officials that he and his family would be able to cross into Egypt, as one of his children is an American citizen. They were on the way from north to south Gaza, heading for the Rafah crossing point on Sunday, when he was rounded up along with other Palestinian men at an Israeli military checkpoint and taken away.
“The army took Mosab when he arrived at the checkpoint, leaving from the north to the south, as the army had ordered. The American embassy sent him and his family to go through the Rafah crossing,” the poet’s brother, Hamza, said on social media.  “We have heard nothing from him.”
A friend of Abu Toha, Diana Buttu, a Palestinian-Canadian lawyer and a former spokesperson for the Palestine Liberation Organization, said: “His son, who was born in America, was cleared to be evacuated a couple of weeks ago, but Mosab’s name was not on the list.”
“Eventually, they got his name and his wife’s name and the other kids on the list, and they were waiting to get out when it was safe,” Buttu said. “They were trying to evacuate from the north to the south, when they were stopped at a checkpoint with a lot of others. They were told to lift their arms to show they didn’t have anything. Mosab was ordered to put his son down and then the army grabbed him, along with a lot of other men, 200, his wife said. His wife has not heard from him since.”
Neither the US state department nor the Israel Defense Forces (IDF), responded to requests for comment.
Abu Toha had been writing in the New Yorker magazine about his experiences under bombardment in Jabalia refugee camp in northern Gaza. A collection of his poetry published in English in the US was a finalist in the National Book Critics Circle award and won an American Book award this year.
“He’s one of our most prolific writers,” Buttu said. “To be so widely published at such a young age and to have got all these awards and acclaim for his writing, it shows you just how powerful a writer he is.”
“He’s an incredible poet,” Laura Albast, a Palestinian journalist, editor and friend of Abu Toha, said. “The poetry he writes is very accessible, but it’s also a representation of what happens to us, describing how he rode his bike to try to reach home while the bombs were falling.”
Abu Toha and his family had taken refuge in Jabalia, where they heard their home in Beit Lahia had been bombed. In a New Yorker article  published on 6 November, he described cycling to the house to try to salvage something from his small book collection.
“I hope to at least find a copy of my own poetry book, maybe near my neighbor’s olive tree, but there is nothing but debris. Nothing but the smell of explosions,” he wrote.
“Now I sit in my temporary house in the Jabalia camp, waiting for a ceasefire. I feel like I am in a cage. I’m being killed every day with my people. The only two things I can do are panic and breathe. There is no hope here.”
“His whereabouts are now unknown,” the New Yorker reported on its website  on Monday night, saying it joined other organisations in calling for his safe return.
 This article was amended on 21 November 2023 to refer to Abu Toha being detained rather than arrested.

Load-Date: November 21, 2023


End of Document




We must fight antisemitism on UK campuses
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 5:43 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS; Version:1
Length: 505 words
Highlight: Mark Rusling says that a university education is clearly no inoculation against anti-Jewish racism, and Lynne Davies is appalled that Jewish students are being targeted at UK institutions
Body


The description of Jewish fear at British universities by an anonymous student at Oxford University is deeply upsetting and yet deeply unsurprising ( Why is antisemitism so rife in UK academic settings? I have never found student life more difficult, 16 November  ).
We like to think that education inoculates us against racism, but that has never been true for anti-Jewish racism. In the 1932 elections in Germany, almost two-thirds of university students voted Nazi (double the rate of their “less educated” peers). The 1942 Wannsee conference  plotted the murder of every European Jew – more than half of the participants held doctorates. University education is not a cure for antisemitism. Might it be a cause?
London in 2023 isn’t Berlin in 1933, but how long ago and how far away is it? In recent weeks there has been a rise in anti-Jewish racism on British campuses. Even some academics have voted for “ Intifada until victory  ”. Clearly, education doesn’t cure racism – and neither does being on the left.
Because this is racism. Targeting British Jewish students because of the Israeli government is racist. Calling for an intifada in the UK is racist (and a crime). For more than 20 years, the police have defined racism as “any incident which is perceived to be racist by the victim”. Why do Jews not merit the same protection?
This is not about our views on the Middle East; this is homegrown British racism. To fight back against this tide of intolerance, the National Holocaust Museum has launched a racism response unit. Whatever your education, whatever your politics, racism is wrong, and we will fight it. Mark RuslingDirector oflearning, National Holocaust Museum
 I read with sadness and bewilderment about the plight of Jewish students being racially abused at UK universities by other students. It would seem that these Jewish students are being inexplicably punished for the actions of the Israeli government. It makes no more sense than UK Muslims suffering racism because of the actions of Hamas.
It is perfectly possible to be opposed to the actions of the Israeli government, despair at the suffering in Gaza and support Palestine and not be anti Jewish. It is perfectly possible to deplore the actions of Hamas without being anti-Muslim or anti-Palestinian.
Surely now more than ever, we as individuals should be coming together, not spreading hate and more division. We cannot sadly affect the course of the conflict but we can at least try to ensure that both Jewish people and Muslims here are treated with decency and not scapegoated for things outside their control. We need to try to shed a little light on to this darkness. Lynne DaviesStourbridge, West Midlands
                       Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please                                                email                         us your letter and it will be considered for publication in our                                                letters                         section.                   

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Morning Mail: the climate scientists who saw crisis coming, hostage hope in Gaza, chaos at OpenAI
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 8:03 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 1330 words
Byline: Martin Farrer
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Morning Mail here, and finish your day with our Afternoon Update newsletter
Body


Morning, everyone. “The longer you work on the climate change beat, the less surprised you are when the very bad things scientists warned would happen, start to happen... But this year has felt different.” So writes our environment reporter, Graham Readfearn, as he kicks off the first part of a special series – The weight of the world: a climate scientist’s burden – in which he has talked to Australia’s pioneering experts about what it feels like to have tried – and often failed – to warn about the need for action on the crisis.
In other news, tensions are building about state funding, there’s still hope for a hostage deal in Israel, and we’ve spoken to the Palestine football coach before their match against Australia tonight.
                   Australia                                                                   Funding fury | Tensions between the NSW and federal Labor governments are rising with the state’s premier, Chris Minns, unhappy  about infrastructure spending cuts and demanding more funding for policing Israel-Hamas war protests.                                                                     Weight of the world | Our first subject in the weight of the world series is Graeme Pearman, who in 1974 travelled the world with six flasks of air to help prove C0 2 levels was rising. Almost 50 years later Pearman asks himself: “Where did I go wrong?”                                                                      Lobby denial | Convenience and grocery stores have refused  to tell a Senate inquiry how much they receive in tobacco and vaping industry funding as parliament seeks to bring in more graphic warnings on packaging.                                                                     Broadcast news | Free-to-air broadcasters say claims by the subscription media lobby that the “government wants to control your TV” through new laws for smart TVs are “highly misleading”.                                                                      Six and out | Gareth Morgan, the Mudgeeraba Bushman third grade captain, wowed the cricketing world by taking six successive wickets last week. A crowd gathered on Saturday to see if he could make it seven but he disappointed  his new fanbase by not even bringing himself on to bowl.                                                           World                                                                   Hostage hope | Joe Biden thinks a hostage deal between Israel and Hamas is near  while the families of the people captured on 7 October have clashed  with far-right Israeli politicians who want to bring in the death penalty as a possible sentence for captured Palestinian militants.                                                                     Open revolt | Hundreds of OpenAI staff members have threatened to quit en masse  if the board overseeing the ChatGPT developer does not reinstate its ousted chief executive, Sam Altman, then step down.                                                                     Johnson ‘bamboozled’ | The UK should have gone into lockdown at least a week before it did , the former chief scientist has told the UK’s Covid inquiry , adding that the former prime minister Boris Johnson was “bamboozled” by the scientific modelling used to make the decision.                                                                     Chauvin appeal rejected | The US supreme court has rejected  a conviction appeal for Derek Chauvin, the former Minneapolis police officer who murdered George Floyd.                                                                      Fiery debate | Albania’s opposition has set off smoke bombs and started a small fire  in the middle of parliament in a failed attempt to stop the chamber from voting on the 2024 budget.                                                           Full Story                   
                     The climate scientists who saw the crisis coming – Weight of the world, part one                   
In part one of this three-part series, three climate change scientists reveal  the moment they realised the planet was heading for certain catastrophe. What did they do when they found out? How did they think the world would respond? And how do they feel today, looking back on that moment of cognisance?
                   In-depth                   
The Socceroos continue their World Cup campaign in Kuwait in the small hours tonight but it’s far from being a routine qualifier – because their opponents are Palestine. The match was meant to have been played in the West Bank town of Ramallah but the Hamas attack on Israel in October changed all that and now the team – minus three players still stuck in Gaza – have decamped to neutral territory. John Duerden has been speaking  to their coach, Makram Daboub (pictured centre), about what the match means to him, Palestinians and the players.
                   Not the news                   
Melbourne Frocktails was started by a group of 30 sewing friends 10 years ago when they decided to go out for dinner wearing outfits they’d made. After photos of the evening were shared on social media, other sewing fans wanted to join in. Now they have to issue tickets and it’s been copied the world over. Lucianne Tonti finds out about an event  where “it’s not weird to touch each other’s clothes and talk endlessly about pattern numbers”.
                   The world of sport                                                                   Cricket | Everything was stacked against Australia winning the World Cup but they took on the challenge  and won. There’s no place for Travis Head in our writers’ team of the tournament  but Pat Cummins is the captain and he has Glenn Maxwell and Adam Zampa alongside him.                                                                     Football | The Socceroos are determined to stay focused when they face Palestine in their away World Cup qualifier, says Harry Souttar.                                                                      Golf | Dutch player Joost Luiten took mislaying equipment to another level when he lost three of his clubs up a tree  at the DP World Tour Championship in Dubai.                                                           Media roundup                   
The Sydney Morning Herald thinks Gladys Berejiklian has a shot at becoming the next boss of Optus  after the resignation of Kelly Bayer Rosmarin. A Tasmanian nurse has lifted the lid on the abuse of health workers  as the state government launches a respect campaign, the Mercury reports. The number of arrests and hospital admittances at Gold Coast schoolies has plummeted  as the event continues to reform its reputation, the Bulletin claims. The AFL draft is big news in Victoria, especially for the Riverine Herald, which celebrates the move by No 1 pick and local Tongala boy Harley Reid to West Coast. 
                   What’s happening today                                                                   Economy | The RBA monetary policy meeting minutes could give some clues about next month’s rate decision.                                                                     Energy | Chris Bowen will speak at the Lowy Institute.                                                           Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Morning Mail update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And finish your day with a three-minute snapshot of the day’s main news. Sign up for our Afternoon Update newsletter here. 
Prefer notifications? If you’re reading this in our app , just click here and tap “Get notifications” on the next screen  for an instant alert when we publish every morning.
                   Brain teaser                   
And finally, here are the Guardian’s crosswords to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow. 
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Monday briefing: The Palestinians determined to get the word out on life inside Gaza
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:52 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: WORLD NEWS; Version:1
Length: 2494 words
Byline: Archie Bland
Highlight: In today’s newsletter: Caught in the Israel-Hamas conflict, people in Gaza are using social media and more to grieve and tell their story Sign up here for our daily newsletter, First Edition
Body


Good morning. As the death toll has risen in Gaza since the beginning of the war, and amid ongoing debates  about which figures are to be trusted, Palestinians have sometimes used variations of a phrase to describe their despair at how invisible their individual losses have been to the wider world: “we are not numbers”.
Because of repeated internet blackouts, power outages making communication difficult and the danger to journalists on the ground, the stories of specific people that might work against that perception have often been difficult to tell. But through accounts like the Guardian’s serialised Gaza diary  by 35-year-old Palestinian Ziad – who has described everything from having his messages of condolence finished by his phone’s autocomplete function  to trying to save the family goldfish  – and the many vivid social media posts coming out of the territory, it has been possible to understand something of the plight experienced by those on the ground.
Meanwhile, Kaamil Ahmed, a reporter on the Guardian’s global development desk, has been writing about the Palestinians he has managed to reach by WhatsApp, direct message and phone. For today’s newsletter, I spoke to Kaamil about the work of telling those stories, and what they tell us about how Palestinians are trying to survive. Here are the headlines.
                   Five big stories                   
                                            Israel-Hamas war  | Israel and Hamas appear to be edging towards a deal  that would see the release of a significant number of hostages, possibly in return for a limited ceasefire and the release of Palestinian prisoners from Israeli jails. Senior US and Israeli officials, as well as the Qatari prime minister, all suggested an agreement was close on Sunday, although observers have cautioned that public statements during such negotiations are often misleading and any potential deal could easily collapse.
                                            Climate  | The richest 1% of humanity is responsible for more carbon emissions  than the poorest 66%, with dire consequences for vulnerable communities and global efforts to tackle the climate emergency, a report says. Read more in the Guardian’s new special series: The great carbon divide.
                                            Economy  | Jeremy Hunt has hinted that Conservative MPs pressing for immediate income tax cuts  could be disappointed, as he insisted he would not take any measures in this week’s autumn statement to fuel inflation. The chancellor said in a series of interviews that tax cuts were “not going to happen overnight”.
                                            Argentina  | Javier Milei, a volatile far-right libertarian who has vowed to “exterminate” inflation and take a chainsaw to the state, has been elected president of Argentina , catapulting South America’s second largest economy into an unpredictable future. Milei, who was congratulated by Donald Trump, Jair Bolsonaro and Elon Musk, secured 55.69% of the vote against 44.3% for centre-left finance minister Sergio Massa.
                                            US news  | Rosalynn Carter, wife of former US president Jimmy Carter, has died at the couple’s Georgia home aged 96.  Carter, who championed mental health and was the first sitting first lady to address the World Health Organisation, was diagnosed with dementia in May and had been receiving hospice care at home. See an obituary  and a life in pictures. 
                   In depth: ‘Every day is a new battle’                   
There is no way for journalists to get into Gaza without an Israel Defense Forces (IDF) escort, and at least 48 of those on the ground have been killed so far  ; the Committee to Protect Journalists says that 43 of them are Palestinian. Ever since the 7 October attack by Hamas that killed over 1,200 Israelis , the stories of ordinary people living through Israel’s bombardment of Gaza have often emerged in other ways.
Kaamil Ahmed used to report in Jerusalem, and sometimes travelled to Gaza for work. After war broke out last month, he started to reach out to his old Palestinian contacts. “But it’s been a very slow process,” he said. “It’s so hard to get hold of people. So as well as that, I’ve been starting again through social media and messaging people posting about the war to ask if they’ll speak to me about what they’ve been through.”
Stories that would take a day for a local reporter in normal circumstances are now the work of a week or more. But through his old contacts and his new ones, Kaamil has told stories of swimming instructors  and writers , English teachers  and breakdancers.  And through those stories, some persistent themes have emerged of how civilians are navigating an unimaginably frightening new reality.
***
Not everyone wants to talk
Among the most useful tools for finding people who want to talk has been Snapchat, which – unlike other social media apps – allows a user to search for posts on a geographic heatmap. “Instead of being filtered by an algorithm based on who you already know, you can reach anyone who’s posting – that’s a good way to get a broader view of what’s happening on the ground,“ Kaamil said. On Instagram, meanwhile, Palestinian users like Motaz Azaiza  and Bisan Owda  are gaining millions of followers.
It’s probably too simple to claim that people in Gaza are universally determined to tell their stories when so many are naturally preoccupied with survival, or have little faith in the outside world to pay attention. And Kaamil is unsettled by the risk of interviews feeling “transactional” – “like you’re jumping in, and taking something, and moving on”.
But, he adds, “most people who are using social media – the reason they are doing it is because they think people need to see how they’re living. A lot of people do see something important in describing what is happening to them.” In those circumstances, he added, “it feels very weird to go through the usual niceties – it seems stupid to ask someone how they are. The conversations are accelerated. If people want to talk, they usually want to get to the point.”
***
Blackouts and power shortages mean communication is precious
The repeated shutdowns of communications in Gaza that appear to have been imposed by Israel  during particularly intense periods of fighting have meant that those waiting for updates on the wellbeing of their friends and loved ones from afar have been kept in the dark. Even when connections are restored, Kaamil said, “they barely have any electricity, so they’re not leaving their phones on all the time”.
When the first blackout happened, one contact of his, the swimming instructor whose Facebook profile turned from celebrations of his students’ successes to tributes to the dead , disappeared from WhatsApp for four days. “And you may not get responses from people for a long time even if they have access to offices and more reliable services,” he added. “Anyone who has a way to communicate is a conduit for information, so they’re being bombarded. You just have to wait and hope they’re ok.”
***
The struggle to survive begins again every day
As Kaamil has heard these stories, he’s been struck by the impossibility for the residents of Gaza of looking beyond their most immediate needs. “Every day is a new battle,” he said. “To find water, to find bread, to charge phones. It takes hours to get to a market, because there’s no fuel for cars. It takes hours to queue for supplies or to use the bathroom, and you can’t cook more food than you need for the next day, because you don’t have a fridge. It doesn’t matter who you are, or who you were before this: everything takes a long time, and there’s nothing to spend your money on. The cycle starts again constantly, for everyone.”
Most people Kaamil speaks to have loved ones who’ve been killed since the war began. That is the context for how they perceive Israel’s campaign: “I hear the word genocide a lot more now,” Kaamil said. “That is a very complicated and contested term [ this piece explains  differing interpretations of what it means, and why Israelis and Palestinians alike feel it is a threat that they now face], but it’s what people there feel.”
***
Civilians in Gaza are no more inherently political than anyone else
Because of the unique misfortune of their geopolitical circumstances, people in Gaza are quite often treated as if they see everything through a political lens; an answer to whether they support Hamas, even before 7 October, was far more likely to be how they would be heard by the wider world than the equivalent question to somebody living in Europe or the US.
“But if you ask somebody a question like that, it doesn’t mean they were thinking about it before you asked them,” Kaamil said. “My experience of Gaza is as a place full of people finding creative ways to get by, and to enjoy their lives. I don’t know anybody who visited Gaza who didn’t enjoy it, and find it, despite everything, actually a nice place to be. That’s part of why it feels so important to show how people are surviving, or trying to survive, now.”
                   What else we’ve been reading                                                               When The Crown first aired, it was considered prestige TV. Michael Hogan explains  why, after seven years, the show has descended into a trashy, soapy drama.Nimo                                                                 Martin Scorsese’s Killers of the Flower Moon has a running time of 3 hours and 26 minutes, which some say is far too long. Andrew Pulver writes  about the dilemma some directors are facing as they cut down original running times, leaving them to rely on streaming services to show their work in full.Nyima Jobe, newsletters team                                                                 I have spent an embarrassing number of hours watching the Real Housewives franchise, but even I do not compare to some of the fans that descended up on Las Vegas for Bravocon. Doreen St. Félix’s report  for the New Yorker has some brilliantly funny details.Nimo                                                                                          Native American representation has massively improved within popular culture, moving away from the long-ingrained stereotypes. Edward Helmore speaks here  with some of the trailblazers changing the narrative.Nyima                                                                                          Mark Brown went to Stockton , a north-east town with the lowest life expectancy in England, and spoke to the older community about what life is like there. Nick Winn, a retired painter and decorator, points to the lack of investment for the low life expectancy, adding that if you asked most people in Westminster where Stockton is “they couldn’t pick it out on a map. Levelling up is just a catchphrase, a gimmick.”Nimo                                                           Sport                   
                       Cricket World Cup | A masterful century for Travis Head took Australia to victory over India  in the tournament final with seven overs to spare. Australia looked wobbly at 47-3 after bowling India out for 240, but recovered to thwart the hopes of the Ahmedabad crowd thanks to Head’s 137 from 120 balls and a doughty 58 not out from Marnus Labuschagne. “The surging energy in the stadium said this game was India’s,” wrote Geoff Lemon.  “But there was one snag. Travis Head is impossible.”
                       Football | Manchester City emerged victorious from their derby  with Manchester United in the Women’s Super League, securing a 3-1 victory after Katie Zelem’s opener for their rivals thanks to goals from Jill Roord, Lauren Hemp, and Khadija Shaw. A 72nd-minute red card for City’s Laia Aleixandri was not enough to bring United back into the match.
                       Formula One | Max Verstappen earned his 18th victory of the season in Las Vegas, recovering from a penalty and an on-track clash with George Russell to take the victory. After a difficult week of buildup to a vital showcase event in the US, Giles Richards wrote , “the sport finally delivered on the streets of the city to such effect that what was a grand gamble genuinely paid off”.
                   The front pages                   
The Guardian  has a special report on its front page with the headline “The 1% polluter elite” as it begins a series on the great carbon divide. Talk of tax cuts dominate other front pages. In the i it’s “Tax cuts for business are my priority, says Hunt” as the paper covers possible plans for the autumn statement. The Mail  continues the theme with,  “Are we finally on brink of a real tax cut?” In the Mirror  it’s “That’s rich”, as the paper covers what it says is an increase in rent of a flat owned by Jeremy Hunt.
The Hamas-Israel war features in the Telegraph  with the headline “Israel on brink of hostage agreement”. The Times  headline is “Sunak faces cabinet row on new plan for Rwanda” with the paper reporting that the prime minister is facing opposition to its plans to opt out of European human rights laws. The Financial Times  leads with “Pressure mounts on OpenAI board to reinstate Altman as chief executive” as the coverage of his sacking continues.
In the Sun,  the headline is “Nuke sub mins from disaster” as the paper says that a Royal Navy submarine was saved as it was sinking to its crush depth.
                   Today in Focus                   
                     The families stuck living in Britain’s unlicensed bedsits                   
Why do so many people end up in unlicensed houses of multiple occupation? And what are the conditions like? Robert Booth reports
                   Cartoon of the day | Edith Pritchett                   
Sign up for Inside Saturday  to see more of Edith Pritchett’s cartoons, the best Saturday magazine content and an exclusive look behind the scenes                   
                   The Upside                   
                     A bit of good news to remind you that the world’s not all bad                   
For the latest in the Guardian’s Seascape  series, Svenja Beller followed Brian von Herzen from The Climate Foundation, who wants to reforest the oceans with seaweed to aid hunger, the ongoing climate emergency and restore ecosystems.
The million-dollar ingredient seaweed has the hopes of “sequestering” carbon dioxide and adding to healthier oceans. If successful, Herzen says “we could change humanity’s relationship with the ocean, from extraction to regeneration.”
Sign up here  for a weekly roundup of The Upside, sent to you every Sunday                   
                   Bored at work?                   
And finally, the Guardian’s puzzles are here to keep you entertained throughout the day – with plenty more on the Guardian’s Puzzles app for iOS  and Android.  Until tomorrow.
Quick crossword Cryptic crossword Wordiply

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Activists will claim damage to Israeli defence firm in UK was lawfully justified
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 6:21 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: UK NEWS; Version:1
Length: 410 words
Byline: Haroon Siddique Legal affairs correspondent
Highlight: Eight Palestine Action members are charged with offences relating to effort to shut Elbit Systems’ UK arm
Body


Palestine Action activists will argue they had “lawful justification” to commit burglary and criminal damage against an Israeli defence company they wanted to shut down, a court has heard.
The eight defendants, including the group’s co-founders, are charged with offences relating to a campaign to put Elbit Systems’ UK arm “out of business”.
Opening the prosecution case at Snaresbrook crown court in north-east London on Monday, Sally Hogan said the defendants, who are not all charged with each of the 13 counts, do not deny committing burglaries, causing damage to the outside of buildings, threatening Elbit’s landlord, Jones Lang LaSalle, in order to put the company out of business nor possession of articles with intent to cause criminal damage, but claim they were entitled to do so in law.
She told the jury: “They caused damage to property, damage that caused thousands of pounds. They went into buildings as trespassers with the intent of causing damage … Why did they want to do that? They wanted to put Elbit out of business.
“They say what we did was with a lawful justification and that is the stark issue for you, members of the jury [to decide upon].”
Hogan said Palestine Action was a “lawful protest group”, set up by Huda Ammori and Richard Barnard, who recruited the other defendants and other individuals to their organisation. She told the jury the prosecution case was that the pair “in a sense directed to others about what they should do”. Hogan said Ammori and Barnard had posted online about what they were doing and “why they said they were justified in taking the action they took”.
The prosecutor said that while there was a right to disagree and protest in the UK, the demonstrations by Palestine Action had crossed the line of what was allowed into unlawful protest and had not followed the rule of law.
She said: “It won’t have escaped your knowledge that there have been many protests recently but the prosecution say there are rules, there are laws to prevent offences being committed during the course of protests.”
The defendants – Ammori, Barnard, Caroline Brouard, Jocelyn Cooney, Robin Refualu, Genevieve Scherer, Nicola Deane and Emily Arnott – are all charged with encouraging people to commit criminal damage against Elbit, which they all deny in fact and in law. They have pleaded not guilty to all of the offences, which are said to have occurred between June 2020 and February 2021.
The case is expected to last six weeks.

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Corrections and clarifications
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 9:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: NEWS; Version:1
Length: 547 words
Byline: Corrections and clarifications column editor
Highlight: The Woman in Black | Melbourn, Cambridgeshire
Body


 The Woman in Black was adapted for the stage by Stephen Mallatratt, not by Robin Herford as an obituary  of the theatre producer Peter Wilson said; Herford directed it (7 November, Journal, p10).
An obituary  of the drama and English teacher Sue Berridge said she had taught at “Melbourne Village college”. Both the college and the Cambridgeshire village in which it is situated are spelled “Melbourn” (8 November, Journal, p7).
 Other recently amended articles include:
Tens of thousands demand Gaza ceasefire at pro-Palestine rallies across Australia
Why are European governments clamping down on the right to protest?
From Reservation Dogs to reggae rock: ‘We’re celebrating the amazing things Natives are doing right now’
Aid charities urge Rishi Sunak to condemn Israel’s siege in Gaza
Joe Manchin’s decision to quit Senate fuels speculation of third-party 2024 bid
Russell T Davies on secrets, sex and falling for Doctor Who: ‘Something clicked in my head: I love you’
                     Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to:                      guardian.readers@theguardian.com                      .                                            
                         You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.                       
                       9                       194                       2023-11-20T21:00:06Z                       true                       false                       2023-11-20T21:00:06Z                       2023-11-21T00:00:00Z                       UK                       The Guardian                       https://www.theguardian.com/p/pctnk                       false                       true                       false                       en                       true                        The Woman in Black was adapted for the stage by Stephen Mallatratt, not by Robin Herford as an obituary of the theatre producer Peter Wilson said; Herford directed it (7 November, Journal, p10).  An obituary of the drama and English teacher Sue Berridge said she had taught at “Melbourne Village college”. Both the college and the Cambridgeshire village in which it is situated are spelled “Melbourn” (8 November, Journal, p7).  Other recently amended articles include: Tens of thousands demand Gaza ceasefire at pro-Palestine rallies across Australia Why are European governments clamping down on the right to protest? From Reservation Dogs to reggae rock: ‘We’re celebrating the amazing things Natives are doing right now’ Aid charities urge Rishi Sunak to condemn Israel’s siege in Gaza Joe Manchin’s decision to quit Senate fuels speculation of third-party 2024 bid Russell T Davies on secrets, sex and falling for Doctor Who: ‘Something clicked in my head: I love you’ Editorial complaints and correction requests can be sent to: guardian.readers@theguardian.com You can also write to: Readers’ editor, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or leave a voicemail on +44 (0) 20 3353 4736.                       1199                       false                       false                                                Corrections and clarifications column editor                                                               

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Palestine coach Makram Daboub: ‘The players are doing their best but it is not easy’
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 2:00 PM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: FOOTBALL; Version:3
Length: 863 words
Byline: John Duerden
Highlight: In their World Cup qualifier against the Socceroos, Palestinian team ‘want to bring a little joy’ to their people amid war
Body


The 7-0 win over Bangladesh in Melbourne last week was about as smooth as possible a start to World Cup qualifying for the Socceroos, but this week’s follow up is set to be anything but that. The Socceroos have landed in a troubled Middle East, where they take on Palestine in a game that has been moved to the neutral venue of Kuwait due to the Israel-Hamas war.
Palestine have not played at home since 2019 and are no strangers to disrupted preparations. But they had been scheduled to play Australia in the West Bank city of Ramallah before the 7 October attacks, during which Hamas killed 1,200 people and took more than 240 people hostage. Since then, 13,000 residents of Gaza have been killed in the Israeli offensive and vast swaths of the territory have been reduced to rubble.
The game in Ramallah would probably have been the biggest to have taken place in Palestine since it became a full Fifa member in 1998. Given the difficulties in getting out of Gaza and the West Bank, Palestine had been training in Jordan since 24 October to ensure they could physically get to their upcoming games. Not all could. Ibrahim Abuimeir, Khaled Al-Nabris and Ahmed Al-Kayed are stuck in Gaza. Many of those who did report for duty are preoccupied with the safety of their friends and family there, as well as in the West Bank.
“Of course, they are worried about the situation and are watching the news in the hotel or on their phones all the time,” Palestine coach Makram Daboub told Guardian Australia in the buildup to Tuesday’s game (Wednesday AEDT). “They are all anxious. They are doing their best but it is not easy.”
Mentally, there are issues but the team are preparing as best they can. At least there was a short journey – from Sharjah in the United Arab Emirates where they last played – for the team that arrived in Kuwait City on Friday looking fit and full of running against Lebanon. “Everyone is fine physically and everyone is excited to achieve a positive result against the Australian team,” Daboub said.
Had the game been scheduled for September rather than November, Socceroos coach Graham Arnold and his side would be playing in front of a passionate and proud home crowd. 
“Playing on our home soil and in front of our fans would have given us even greater motivation and a great advantage in our chance to achieve victory,” Daboub said. “Even more so as I think Australia are not accustomed to playing on artificial grass. It would have been a huge event and everyone was looking forward to it. We also have a very good record at home.”
However, with violence also increasing in the West Bank, that home-field advantage has been lost. But there is the prospect of a healthy attendance at the Jaber Al-Ahmad International Stadium in Kuwait. “We hope that there will be a large crowd that is made up of Palestinians, Kuwaitis and other Arab communities that are residing in Kuwait,” Daboub said. “Their presence will be a great incentive and give us great support.”
That was in contrast to the empty stadium that Palestine faced in their opening game. Just hours after Australia put seven past Bangladesh, the lowest-ranked team in the group, Palestine were drawing 0-0 with Lebanon in Sharjah, in a match moved from Beirut due to security issues. For two evenly matched teams, the result was not a surprise but Daboub was pleased with most aspects of the performance which would have been even better had star forward Oday Dabbagh not been denied in the final moments.
“We deserved to win as we had a lot of scoring opportunities that we could not take,” the Tunisian said. “Lebanon are a strong team, however, and there are still five games left to play.”
Given that the top two teams from each of the nine groups of four will advance to the next stage and with Australia and Bangladesh expected to take first and last place, Lebanon and Palestine will probably compete for the second spot. For the latter, a first ever place in the final round of World Cup qualifying is the prize. Any points that can be taken off Australia, ranked 69 places higher at 27th, would be a major bonus.
“It is going to be very difficult,” said Daboub, who would not reveal whether he would tinker with his usual 4-3-3 formation. “We will be playing against one of the best teams in Asia at the present time, and our focus and mental presence must be high, and we must play with all our strength and fight for the ball on the field to achieve a positive result.”
Daboub is confident that despite the horrors at home, his players can pull off a result that would not only set the team on course for a first-ever final round spot but would be something historic and meaningful for millions of Palestinians around the world.
“We will not sit back and defend only,” he said. “We want to win. Whatever happens, I am proud of the players. They are doing their best and want to bring a little joy to the people of Palestine.”
                                                               Palestine play Australia at 5pm Tuesday (local)/1am Wednesday (AEDT) at Jabar Al-Ahmad International Stadium in Kuwait. Follow our blog for live updates                                                         

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Families criticise UK government’s repatriation guidance in Gaza conflict
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 5:00 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: POLITICS; Version:1
Length: 694 words
Byline: Geneva Abdul
Highlight: Relative ‘shocked’ by advice for family members who crossed into Egypt to split temporarily and apply for reunification from Britain
Body


Relatives of British citizens recently evacuated from Gaza and those waiting to return to the UK have criticised the government’s repatriation guidance, as UK officials continue to support nationals crossing into Egypt.
Ahmad Abou-Foul’s family safely crossed from Gaza into Egypt on 3 November. He said they were “shocked” after arriving in Cairo when UK immigration officers advised the individuals with British passports to return to the UK with their children, and once there, start a reunification process for their Palestinian spouses.
“They were asking us to split a four-month-old from his mother – and a one-year-old and two-year-old,” said Abou-Foul, an NHS surgeon from Birmingham, whose 16 relatives – including young children – returned to the UK on Saturday.
“We were shocked. Probably they didn’t have a plan; this is what we felt,” he said.
After enduring weeks of Israeli bombardment that has killed more than 12,000 people , the family asked officials why they were being treated differently than in recent evacuations, such as those from Sudan , Ukraine and Afghanistan.  Abou-Foul said the family were told that each situation was different.
Abou-Foul paid £16,000 in visa fees for three adults and two children. The family was not given any guidance or informed of any fee waivers, he said, and were asked to arrange their return at their own cost. The Guardian understands there have been repatriation cases in which individuals have had visa fees waived.
“What was the reason for us to be given this option?” said Abou-Foul, adding he did not think it was intentional but due to insufficient planning by the UK government. 
“Why weren’t we supported by the FCDO [Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office]?
“If I have to do it again, I will do it again, because at that time I would have paid everything I have to get my family to safety.”
While the family is among the hundreds of foreign nationals  who have escaped Israel’s airstrikes and the spiralling humanitarian crisis, more than 2 million people in Gaza, almost half of whom are children, remain under siege after Hamas militants killed at least 1,200 people and abducted 240 hostages in a surprise attack on Israel on 7 October.
The Rafah crossing first opened on 1 November to allow specific groups of foreign nationals and the seriously wounded to leave. By early November, more than half  of the British nationals seeking to escape Gaza  for Egypt had managed to do so.
The Guardian understands that transportation to Cairo and two nights’ of accommodation is being provided to British nationals and their dependants. While flights are not being facilitated, loans are being offered in a temporary exchange for passports.
“It’s not easy to afford the cost of the four tickets,” said a British national in Cairo who asked to remain anonymous.
“I can’t think how I am going to pay back the loan while my medical centre is closed, maybe damaged, and we left everything in Gaza.”
For six weeks, the family lived under Israeli bombardment, moving from northern Gaza to Khan Younis, the biggest city in the south, where tens of thousands of people have been evacuated in recent weeks.
After evacuating from Gaza seven days ago, the family has extended their stay in Egypt as they wait for a visa to be processed for a family member without a British passport. 
Tessa Gregory, a human rights team partner at the law firm Leigh Day, said: “Our client and her British family who were living in Gaza have fled a war zone where they have survived desperate conditions and witnessed unspeakable violence.
“In these circumstances the British government should be doing everything within its power to get the family back to the UK as quickly as possible so they can start to rebuild their lives.
“We hope the Foreign Office will now reconsider its policy and cover the costs of flights for this family.”
A government spokesperson said: “The safety of British nationals remains a top priority. 
“We are working at pace to support British families who have crossed the border into Egypt, making sure any dependants who need a visa can apply for one and that appropriate checks are carried out in a timely manner.”

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document




Afternoon Update: richest 10% causing 50% of emissions; Optus CEO resigns; and Argentina’s Trump elected president
The Guardian (London)
November 20, 2023 Monday 5:38 AM GMT


Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved


Section: AUSTRALIA NEWS; Version:1
Length: 971 words
Byline: Antoun Issa
Highlight: Want to get this in your inbox every weekday? Sign up for the Afternoon Update here, and start your day with our Morning Mail newsletter.
Body


Good afternoon. The richest 1% in the world account for more carbon emissions than the poorest 66%, a major new report reveals.
For the past six months, the Guardian has worked with Oxfam, the Stockholm Environment Institute and other experts on an exclusive basis to produce a special investigation, The Great Carbon Divide. 
Read how the richest 10%  are causing 50% of the world’s emissions and how the 12 billionaires  below are out-polluting 2.1m homes.
                   Top news                                                                   Port Phillip plane crash | Pilot Stephen Gale and passenger James Rose – a TV camera operator – have been identified  as missing after a Viper S-211 Marchetti jet crashed into the water. Police believe the pair were killed in a mid-air collision on Sunday which saw their aircraft plunge 20 metres into Port Phillip Bay. The second aircraft was able to safely land at Essendon airport.                                                                     Israel claims hostages taken to al-Shifa hospital | Israel’s military has released security camera footage it said  showed hostages being brought into al-Shifa hospital in Gaza City on 7 October after being kidnapped during Hamas’s attacks. In response, the Hamas-run health ministry in Gaza reportedly said it was not able to confirm the authenticity of the footage. Hamas previously said it took some hostages to hospitals for treatment.  Meanwhile, the UNRWA says  nearly 884,000 internally displaced Palestinians are sheltering across 154 of its shelters. In total, 1.7 million Palestinians have become displaced by Israeli attacks on the Gaza Strip, and only nine out of the 22 UNRWA health centres are operational, the UN says.                                                                                                           Argentina’s Trump elected president | Javier Milei, a volatile, climate-denying populist who has been compared to Donald Trump, has been elected president of Argentina , catapulting South America’s second largest economy into an unpredictable and potentially turbulent future. During his campaign, Milei – who will take office on 10 December – vowed to abolish the central bank and dollarise the economy in order to overcome a financial calamity that has left 40% of Argentina’s 45 million citizens in poverty and pushed inflation to more than 140%.                                                                     Optus CEO resigns | Kelly Bayer Rosmarin is stepping down  following the nationwide outage that took down phone and internet services for 14 hours close to two weeks ago.                                                                     Moira Deeming to lodge defamation claim against Liberal leader | The Victorian MP says she will lodge proceedings  against John Pesutto, declaring mediation has failed. The first-term MP was expelled from the parliamentary Liberal party after she took part in an anti-transgender rally in March that was gatecrashed by a group of masked men who performed Nazi salutes.                                                                                                           Russell Brand interviewed by police | Scotland Yard detectives have interviewed Brand  over allegations of sexual offences, it is understood. The comedian and actor is understood to have been interviewed under caution at a police station in south London last week. Brand has denied “very serious criminal allegations” and “extremely egregious and aggressive attacks”, which he said he “absolutely refutes”.                                                                     Suzanne Shepherd, GoodFellas and The Sopranos actor, dies aged 89 | Shepherd died at her home  in New York City on Friday local time, her agent confirmed to the Hollywood Reporter. The Sopranos actor Ray Abruzzo paid tribute to Shepherd on Instagram, calling her “a force of nature”.                                                           In pictures                   
                     Australia stun India to win Cricket World Cup final                   
Australia have overcome hosts India by six wickets in Ahmedabad to deservedly win their sixth title. Click here to see some of the best images  from the Narendra Modi Stadium, and read this post-match review  by Geoff Lemon, filed from Ahmedabad.
                   What they said …                   
***
“I don’t know where it’s going with Donald Trump. What I can tell you is that the things that he talks about are frightening to those of us who know the history of Europe in the 1930s and 40s. And I’m deeply concerned about his predilection for revenge and what that will mean for groups of people that didn’t support him in the 2024 election if he gets elected.” – JB Pritzker, Illinois governor
                   In numbers                   
That would equate to about one million Australian men. The figure includes contact that is not illegal, as the age of consent in Australia is 16 or 17. According to University of New South Wales research published today, there is nothing rare  about the sexual abuse of children.
                   Before bed read                   
It’s the 50th anniversary of jousting – yes, jousting – in Australia. Armoured knights descended upon Kryal Castle in Ballarat, Victoria, and it was quite the scene.
Check out the photo gallery.
                   Daily word game                   
Today’s starter word is: FOOT.  You have five goes to get the longest word including the starter word. Play Wordiply. 
                   Sign up                   
If you would like to receive this Afternoon Update to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.  And start your day with a curated breakdown of the key stories you need to know. Sign up for our Morning Mail newsletter here.

Load-Date: November 20, 2023


End of Document
